OPEN
Reactive oxygen species-mediated therapeutic
response and resistance in glioblastoma
E Singer1, J Judkins1, N Salomonis2, L Matlaf1, P Soteropoulos3, S McAllister*,1 and L Soroceanu*,1
Glioblastoma (GBM) resistance to therapy is the most common cause of tumor recurrence, which is ultimately fatal in 90% of the
patients 5 years after initial diagnosis. A sub-population of tumor cells with stem-like properties, glioma stem cells (GSCs), is
specifically endowed to resist or adapt to the standard therapies, leading to therapeutic resistance. Several anticancer agents,
collectively termed redox therapeutics, act by increasing intracellular levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS). In this study, we
investigated mechanisms underlying GSC response and resistance to cannabidiol (CBD), a non-toxic, non-psychoactive
cannabinoid and redox modulator. Using primary GSCs, we showed that CBD induced a robust increase in ROS, which led to the
inhibition of cell survival, phosphorylated (p)-AKT, self-renewal and a significant increase in the survival of GSC-bearing mice.
Inhibition of self-renewal was mediated by the activation of the p-p38 pathway and downregulation of key stem cell regulators
Sox2, Id1 and p-STAT3. Following CBD treatment, a subset of GSC successfully adapted, leading to tumor regrowth. Microarray,
Taqman and functional assays revealed that therapeutic resistance was mediated by enhanced expression of the antioxidant
response system Xc catalytic subunit xCT (SLC7A11 (solute carrier family 7 (anionic amino-acid transporter light chain), member
11)) and ROS-dependent upregulation of mesenchymal (MES) markers with concomitant downregulation of proneural (PN)
markers, also known as PN–MES transition. This ‘reprogramming’ of GSCs occurred in culture and in vivo and was partially due to
activation of the NFE2L2 (NRF2 (nuclear factor, erythroid 2-like)) transcriptional network. Using genetic knockdown and
pharmacological inhibitors of SLC7A11, we demonstrated that combining CBD treatment with the inhibition of system Xc resulted
in synergistic ROS increase leading to robust antitumor effects, that is, decreased GSC survival, self-renewal, and invasion.
Our investigation provides novel mechanistic insights into the antitumor activity of redox therapeutics and suggests that
combinatorial approaches using small molecule modulators of ROS offer therapeutic benefits in GBM.
Cell Death and Disease (2015) 6, e1601; doi:10.1038/cddis.2014.566; published online 15 January 2015
Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most common primary brain tumor
in adults and poses significant therapeutic challenges. Recent
transcriptome profiling of GBM tissues yielded molecular
subclasses driven by specific genetic alterations and which
correlated with patient outcome.1–4 Among the four GBM
subtypes (classical, neural, proneural (PN), and mesenchy-
mal (MES)), MES identity is the hallmark of glioma aggres-
siveness and strongly associated with the poor outcome of
patients.5 In fact, upon disease recurrence, a therapy-induced
PN–MES transition (PMT) of GBM tumors has been docu-
mented in some patient samples.5 PMT may represent for
GBM the equivalent of epithelial–MES transition associated
with other aggressive cancers; however, the molecular
mechanisms underlying this transition remain elusive.6 A
subset of GBM cells with stem-like characteristics, termed
glioma stem cells (GSCs), have been shown to underlie the
therapeutic resistance and tumor recurrence in GBM.6,7
Uncovering the mechanisms underlying the therapeutic
response and resistance of GSCs is of critical importance.
Reactive oxygen species (ROS) are natural by-products of
aerobic metabolism and they can promote normal cell
proliferation through the activation of growth-related signaling
pathways.8 Most anticancer drugs kill their target cells, at least
in part, through the generation of elevated amounts of
intracellular ROS.9 ROS can exert different effects according
to the basal metabolic rate of the cell. The high basal metabolic
rate of cancer cells makes them more susceptible to redox-
directed therapeutics in comparison with non-transformed
cells.10 Redox-directed therapeutics have been developed to
act as direct inhibitors of cancer and to sensitize tumors to first-
line agents; however, they are associated with significant
toxicity.9 The discovery of non-toxic molecules that selectively
upregulate ROS in malignant cells would be beneficial.
Cannabidiol (CBD) is a non-toxic and non-psychoactive
cannabinoid that has been shown to have antitumor activity in
multiple cancer types.11 Activation of CB1 and CB2 receptors
has been previously shown to lead to the inhibition of tumor
progression;12 however, CBD does not interact efficiently with
1California Pacific Medical Center Research Institute, San Francisco, CA, USA; 2Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, USA and 3Center for Applied
Genomics, UMDNJ, Newark, NJ, USA
*Corresponding author: S McAllister or L Soroceanu, California Pacific Medical Center Research Institute, 475 Brannan Street, Suite 220, San Francisco, CA 94107, USA.
Tel: +1 415 600 1770; Fax: +1 415 600 1725; E-mail: McAllis@cpmcri.org (SM) or sorocel@cpmcri.org (LS)
Received 04.11.14; accepted 27.11.14; Edited by A Finazzi-Agrò
Abbreviations: ARE, antioxidant response element; BLI, biolouminescence imaging; CBD, cannabidiol; CI, combination index; DCF, 2′,7′ dichlorofluorescein diacetate;
ELDA, extreme limited dilution assay; ERA, erastin; Fer, ferrostatin; GBM, glioblastoma; GSC, glioma stem cell; GSH, glutathione (reduced); IC50, 50% inhibitory
concentration; IHC, immunohistochemistry; MES, mesenchymal; NRF2, nuclear factor, erythroid 2-like; PMT, proneural–mesenchymal transition; PN, proneural; PTGS2,
prostaglandin-endoperoxidase synthase 2; ROS, reactive oxygen species; SAS, sulfasalazine; SLC7A11, solute carrier family 7 (anionic amino-acid transporter light chain),
member 11; siRNA, small interfering RNA; shRNA, short hairpin RNA; VitE, vitamin E
Citation: Cell Death and Disease (2015) 6, e1601; doi:10.1038/cddis.2014.566
& 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited
All rights reserved 2041-4889/15
www.nature.com/cddis
CB1 and CB2 receptors, and the initial site CBD interacts with
to produce antitumor activity is unknown. Our recent study
demonstrated CBD-produced robust antitumor activity against
a human-derived GBM in an intracranial xenograft model;13
however, no investigations to date have interrogated the
therapeutic effects of CBD on GSCs.
One of the major systems used by both normal and
cancerous cells to counteract oxidative insult is the NRF2
(also known as NFE2L2) transcriptionally regulated program.9
The role of NRF2 transcriptional regulator and SLC7A11
(solute carrier family 7 (anionic amino-acid transporter light
chain), member
11) in mediating
GBM response and
resistance to redox-directed therapeutics has not been
evaluated.
In the current study, we systematically interrogated thera-
peutic response to CBD using several GSC lines in culture and
in vivo. Our results demonstrate that while CBD exhibits
significant antitumor activity, a subset of GSCs adapt by
activating an extended antioxidant cellular response. We show
that cotargeting GSCs using ROS modulators (CBD) and
inhibitors of the antioxidant response genes together is more
effective than either approach alone in halting GBM growth.
Results
CBD inhibits GSC viability in an ROS-dependent manner.
Primary GSC lines 3832 and 387 were treated with a range of
CBD concentrations and evaluated in viability assays. CBD
inhibited the viability of 3832 and 387 GSCs with an IC50
(50% inhibitory concentration) value of 3.5 μM (3.4–3.6) and
2.6 μM (2.5–2.7), respectively (Figures 1a and b). In both
GSC cultures, CBD increased the production of ROS
(Figures 1c and d), which was reversed in the presence of
vitamin E (VitE) (or α-tocopherol). In agreement with these
data, the effects of CBD on cell viability were reversed in the
presence of the ROS scavenger (Figures 1e and f).
CBD
treatment
improves
survival
of
mice
bearing
intracranial GSC xenografts. We next performed efficacy
studies in vivo, using two models of intracranial GBM
xenografts, established by a low number (5 × 103) of GSC
lines 3832 and 387. As demonstrated in Figure 2, this low
number of cells can seed highly aggressive tumors. Tumor
progression is rapid and the median survival in 3832 and 387
cells was 27 and 21 days, respectively. CBD treatment
significantly
prolonged
survival
in
tumor
bearing
mice
(Figures 2a and b). Immunohistochemical (IHC) analyses of
GBM xenograft tissues demonstrated that CBD treatment
inhibited p-AKT, Ki67 and stimulated the activation of
caspase-3 in GBM in vivo (Figure 2c). Control antibody and
hematoxylin and eosin staining are shown in Supplementary
Figure 2. Using bioluminescence measurements, we moni-
tored tumor growth and response to CBD therapy in real
time. Our data demonstrate that following initial inhibition of
tumor growth by CBD (day 22), intracranial GBM tumors
appear to resume a more rapid growth rate in spite of
continuous CBD administration (Figure 2d). These data
suggest that in vivo, a sub-population of CBD-treated GSCs
adapted during therapy and became resistant. We next set
out to investigate mechanisms underlying both response and
resistance to CBD treatment in tumors derived from GSCs.
CBD inhibits GSC self-renewal in an ROS-dependent
manner. We previously showed that CBD inhibits
Id1
expression in primary-derived GBM lines and that Id1 genetic
knockdown inhibits self-renewal and Sox2 expression in
primary GBM cells.14 In this study, we directly investigated
the effects of CBD on self-renewal and stemness of GSC.
Using sphere formation assays (10, 100 and 1000 cells per
well), we determined that CBD inhibits GSC self-renewal in
both 3832 and 387 lines and this effect was partially reversed
by cotreatment with the antioxidant VitE (40 μM) (Figures 3a
and b). Using the limited dilution tumorsphere formation
assay in conjunction with extreme limiting dilution analysis
(ELDA)
software
analysis
package
(available
from
Walter+Eliza Hall Institute, Parkville, VIC, Australia),15 we
determined
that
the
cancer
stem
cell
frequency
was
significantly inhibited by CBD in both GSC lines (Figure 3b,
lower panel). Mechanistically, we found that CBD inhibits the
expression of Sox2, Id1, p-STAT3 and upregulates phos-
phorylated (p)-p38 MAPK, all of which have been connected
to
inhibition
of
self-renewal
and
stemness
in
GBM.16
Importantly, these effects were also dependent on ROS
production, as demonstrated by partial or complete reversal
induced by cotreatment with VitE (Figure 3c). IHC analyses of
GBM xenograft tissues demonstrated that CBD treatment
inhibited both Id1 and Sox2 expression in vivo (Figure 3d).
CBD treatment upregulates antioxidant response genes
and induces a shift to an MES molecular phenotype. To
investigate the mechanism underlying the resistant GBM
phenotype
suggested
by
partial
therapeutic
response
(Figures 2c and d), we profiled RNA extracted from three
GSC lines treated with vehicle and CBD on Affymetrix Gene
St 1 DNA Arrays (Affymetrix, Inc., Santa Clara, CA, USA)
(Figure 4a). Raw data is available at http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE57978.
Using standard analyses of microarray in conjunction with
Altanalyze software (developed by Dr. Nathan Salomonis;
http://www.genmapp.org/AltAnalyze/), we determined that
significantly altered transcripts belong to several functional
classes. Specifically, we measured a downregulation of
stemness markers (MELK, OLIG2), PN markers (DLL3,
PDGFRA)
and
proliferation
markers
(Ki67,
Top2A)
(Figure 4a). Concomitantly, we measured significant upregu-
lation
of
several
antioxidant
response
gene
products
(SLC7A11, NRF2) as well as MES GBM markers (CD44,
TNSFR10, CEBPB; Figure 4a). Taqman validation for a subset
of 12 genes was performed using additional GSC lines, as well
as acutely dissociated patient GBM cells treated with CBD.
Taqman analysis confirmed the molecular signature shift
induced by CBD (Figure 4b). Western blot analysis further
corroborated these findings in both 3832 and 387 GSC lines
(Supplementary Figure 1). Taken together, these data suggest
that the partial therapeutic efficacy of CBD against GBM is due
to a subset of tumor cells upregulating antioxidant response
genes and undergoing an adaptive reprogramming toward a
resistant, MES phenotype. PMT has been previously docu-
mented to occur in GBM following radiation5 or antiangiogenic
ROS mediate glioblastoma response to therapy
E Singer et al
2
Cell Death and Disease
therapy.17 Given the significant upregulation of the antioxidant
response
gene
products,
we
investigated
whether
the
phenotypic shift toward a resistant, MES molecular profile
was ROS-dependent. Cotreatment with ROS scavenger VitE
partially reverted the CBD-induced MES shift measured in
3832 GSCs both at the transcript and protein levels (Figures
4c and d). In agreement with these data, upregulation of the
MES marker CD44 was measured specifically in GBM
xenografts from CBD-treated mice, in vivo (Figure 4e).
CBD-induced antioxidant response is mediated by NRF2
activation. Analysis of transcription factor activation, pre-
dicted from the analysis of microarray data using Altanalyze
software indicated significant activation of the NFE2L2
(NRF2) transcriptional network (Figure 5a). To confirm the
activation of NRF2 in another GSC line, we used 3832 cells
treated with CBD or CBD+VitE. Western blot analysis 48 h
following treatment demonstrates that the expression levels
of the NRF2 targets SLC7A11 (xCT) and HMOX-1 were
upregulated
and
these
effects were
reversed
by VitE
(Figure 5b). Next, we sought to investigate the molecular
mechanism underlying NRF2-mediated activation of xCT and
the overall antioxidant response program induced by CBD. In
resting conditions, NRF2 is held inactive in the cytoplasm by
KEAP1, being translocated to the nucleus following oxidative
injury or stress.18 We used western blot analyses of
Figure 1
CBD inhibits GSC viability and induces apoptosis through the production of ROS. (a and b) GSC lines 3832 and 387 were treated with vehicle or CBD (μM) for
2 days and cell viability was then evaluated. Viability (%) was calculated as the Dojindo reagent product absorbance in the treated cells/control cellsx100. GSCs (c) 3832 and (d)
387 were treated with vehicle or CBD (2 μM) for 2 days and the production of ROS was measured using DCF and cell flow cytometry. (e and f) The contribution of ROS in CBD-
dependent (2 μM) reductions in cell viability was evaluated using 40 μM VitE as an antagonist. Data were compared using a one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with a
corresponding Dunnett’s post hoc test. *,#Statistically significant differences from control and CBD, respectively (Po0.01)
ROS mediate glioblastoma response to therapy
E Singer et al
3
Cell Death and Disease
subcellular fractions from CBD-treated GSC 3832, and
determined that upon CBD treatment, the nuclear fraction
of NRF2 was increased, an effect reversed by VitE (Figures
5c and d). Promoter activation assays confirmed that CBD
induced
NRF2
activation
in
a
concentration-dependent
manner and this effect was reversed by VitE (Figure 5e).
Taken together, these data indicate that CBD induces NRF2
activation, which in turns induces antioxidant response
genes. Importantly, IHC analyses of xenograft tumor tissues
from glioma bearing mice demonstrated in vivo upregulation
of NRF2 and xCT in CBD treated as compared with vehicle-
treated tumors (Figure 5e), suggesting that this may be a key
pathway underlying resistance to the CBD-based redox
therapeutic.
Genetic targeting of SLC7A11 inhibits GSC self-renewal
and cooperates with CBD to inhibit cell survival. Given
the robust upregulation of SLC7A11, we hypothesized that
targeting its expression or function would revert some of the
adaptive antioxidant response and thus render a more
efficient therapeutic response in GSCs. We next used a pool
of small interfering RNA (siRNA) sequences to target
SLC7A11 in GSC 387, and measured the effects on cell
viability and reduced glutathione (GSH) levels. We found that
SLC7A11 knockdown inhibited GSH levels and these effects
were reverted by pretreatment with the N-acetyl cysteine
antioxidant (Supplementary Figures 3a and b). SLC7A11
knockdown cells showed enhanced sensitivity to CBD as
compared with control siRNA-treated GSCs (Supplementary
Figure
3c).
To
stably
inhibit
the
expression
levels
of
SLC7A11, we used a lentivirus-mediated knockdown, using
two distinct short hairpin RNA (shRNA) sequences. Protein
knockdown was significant (Supplementary Figure 3d) and
the xCT-knockdown GSCs were impaired in their ability
to form tumorspheres (Supplementary Figures 3e and f).
Attempts to expand xCT-knockdown cells for in vivo studies
Figure 2
CBD prolongs survival mice bearing intracranial tumors derived from GSCs. Tumors were generated in female athymic nu/nu mice by the intracranial injection of
5 × 103 cells (a) 3832 or (b) 387 luciferase-labeled cells in 4 μl of media. Treatments were started at day 9 following BLI confirmation of tumor presence (using IVIS Lumina) and
randomization of mice. Starting on day 9, 15 mg/kg of CBD was administered intraperitoneally 5 days a week until completion of the experiment. Animal health was monitored
daily and when mice showed signs of disease progression, they were humanely killed in accordance with institutional IACUC guidelines. Survival data was evaluated using
Kaplan–Meier curves and a long-rank Mantel–Cox test. (c) Representative tumor sections represent inhibition of Ki67 (upper panel) staining, upregulation of cleaved caspase-3
(middle panel) and inhibition of p-AKT (lower panel) induced by CBD. Tumors were harvested 25 days after tumor induction. Bar = 200 μm. (d) BLI measurements demonstrate
initial response to CBD (reduction of tumor size at day 22), followed by tumor resistance to treatment 1 week later (day 29)
ROS mediate glioblastoma response to therapy
E Singer et al
4
Cell Death and Disease
were not successful. As previously reported for cell lines,19
pharmacological inhibition of xCT inhibited reduced GSH
levels in GSC 3832 (Supplementary Figure 4).
Pharmacological targeting of xCT/system Xc inhibits
GSC survival, in an additive manner with CBD. Analysis
of multiple PN and MES GBM samples demonstrated MES
gliomas
consistently
expressed
higher
levels
of
xCT
(Supplementary Figure 5a). These results suggest that the
upregulation of xCT occurs in more aggressive GBM tumors.
We next wished to pharmacologically inhibit xCT using
sulfasalazine (SAS), which has been previously shown to
inhibit its function.19 SAS inhibited tumorsphere formation in
GSCs by ~ 40% (Supplementary Figure 5b). Concentration–
response curves showed that SAS inhibited GSC 3832 and
387 cell viability with IC50 values of 564 μM (546–582) and
548 μM
(522–575),
respectively,
demonstrating
limited
potency of the drug in culture (Supplementary Figures 5c
and d). At these concentrations, SAS had limited solubility.
We next measured the effect of combining CBD and SAS to
target GSCs. Even under suboptimal conditions (due to SAS
precipitation at high concentration), the combination of SAS
enhanced the activity of CBD
in an additive manner
(Supplementary Figures 5c and e). Western blot analysis of
SAS-treated
GSC
cultures
demonstrated
inhibition
of
proliferation markers (TOP2A) and upregulation of xCT
(Supplementary Figure 5f). Administration of SAS in vivo
was ineffective at targeting intracranial tumors derived from
GSC 3832 cells because of its limited solubility and lack of
potency. As shown in Supplementary Figure 5h, the levels of
SLC7A11 were not upregulated in intracranial tumors derived
from GSC 3832 cells during treatment with SAS, unlike the
cultured GSCs, which have direct access to SAS. Given the
limitations of administering SAS at effective concentrations
in vivo to target GSCs, we turned our attention to a recently
discovered novel class of system Xc inhibitors, Erastin (ERA),
and its analog, piperazine erastine (PE). Both drugs showed
efficacy in inhibiting system Xc in several cancer cell lines
and induced cell death via an iron-dependent mechanism,
which
is
named
as
ferroptosis,
in
culture
and
in
a
subcutaneous xenograft cancer model.20–22 Although neither
drug is able to cross the blood–brain barrier, their improved
potency for targeting xCT made them important tools for
Figure 3
CBD inhibits GSC self-renewal. (a) GSC lines 3832 and 387 were subjected to sphere formation assays and sphere numbers were recorded 10 days later.
*, #Po0.01 for 2 μM CBD and 2 μM CBD+40 μM VitE, respectively, compared with vehicle. The experiment was repeated two times. (b) Sphere frequency was measured using a
limited dilution assay in both GSC lines treated with CBD ± VitE. Upper panel shows representative photomicrographs in the indicated conditions. Lower panel table shows
median stem cell frequency calculated using the ELDA software. (c) Western blot analyses in 3832 cells treated with 2 μM CBD or CBD+VitE for 48 h, using the indicated
antibodies. Activation of the p-p38 pathway concomitantly with the downregulation of the self-renewal master regulators, p-STAT3, Sox2 and Id1, are shown. (d) IHC analyses of
xenograft glioma tissues from mice treated with vehicle or CBD (22 days). Staining with Sox2 and ID1 antibodies are shown. Bar = 100 μm
ROS mediate glioblastoma response to therapy
E Singer et al
5
Cell Death and Disease
further evaluating combination therapy in culture with our
cannabinoid-based redox therapeutic, CBD.
Novel system Xc inhibitors ERA and PE inhibit GSC
viability in a dose-dependent manner and act synergis-
tically with CBD to inhibit GSC viability. ERA and PE
inhibited GSC 387 viability with an IC50 value of 11.1 μM
(10.5–11.8) and 10 μM (9.5–10.5), respectively (Figures 6a
and c). In 387 cells, the inhibitory effects of ERA and PE were
partially reverted by the iron chelators deferoxamine mesy-
late
(DFO)
and
ferrostatin
(Fer)
(Figures
6b
and
d),
demonstrating that these small molecules exert their anti-
tumor effect along the same pathways as described for other
cancers.20,21 PE upregulated PTGS2 (prostaglandin-endo-
peroxidase synthase 2) levels in GSC and this effect was
reversible by VitE and DFO (Figure 6e). PTGS2 is a
pharmacodynamic marker of system Xc inhibition.20–22
Importantly, CBD in combination with ERA led to a
synergistic
increase
in
the
inhibition
of
GSC
viability
(Figures 7a and b). The effect on viability with the combination
of CBD+ERA correlated with an enhanced production of ROS
(Figures 7c and d). Furthermore, we performed two functional
assays, which measure pathognomonic features of glioma,
that is, invasion and self-renewal. Matrigel invasion assays
demonstrate that CBD and ERA synergistically inhibited tumor
cell invasion, as shown in Figures 7e and f. Self-renewal was
assessed using a limited dilution assay, which demonstrated
that treatment with CBD+ERA significantly downregulated
GBM stem cell frequency in two GSC cell lines (Figures 7g and h).
The combination treatment was more efficient than either drug
used alone (Figures 7g and h). We have also tested the
Figure 4
CBD treatment induces ROS-dependent PMT in GBM. (a) CBD treatment results in large-scale differential gene expression. Gene expression as log 2 fold changes,
normalized between vehicle- and CBD- (2 μM) treated groups for each cell line, are shown for 2107 protein coding and 243 noncoding RNAs (fold 41.25 and false discovery
rates (FDR)-adjusted t-test, Po0.1). Predicted crucial regulatory factors are indicated on the right of the graph. Red depicts upregulation, while blue indicates downregulation.
(b) Taqman validation of several PN (indicated in green) and MES (in red) markers in three additional GSC lines and an acutely dissociated patient tissue (CPMC146) confirm
CBD-induced PMT. (c) Taqman analysis of PN and MES markers in 3832 cells treated with CBD or CBD+VitE. Results were normalized to Rab14 expression levels. (d) The 3832
GSCs treated with CBD ± VitE were subjected to western blot analysis using the indicated antibodies to detect PN (Olig2) and MES (CD44) markers. (e) IHC analysis of GBM
xenograft tissue sections from mice treated with vehicle or CBD (intraperitoneally 15 mg/kg, 5 days per week). Tumor tissue was harvested at 29 days after tumor implantation.
Bar = 50 μm
ROS mediate glioblastoma response to therapy
E Singer et al
6
Cell Death and Disease
Figure 5
CBD induces nuclear translocation and activation of NRF2 and its downstream targets. (a) Visualization of CBD-associated gene expression changes along the
NRF2 transcriptional network. Molecules shown in red were significantly upregulated by CBD (42 × ). (b) Western blot analysis confirms ROS-dependent upregulation of NRF2
target proteins HMOX-1 and xCT, following 48 h treatment with CBD ± 40 μM VitE. (c) Subcellular fractionation using GSC 3832 cell line treated with CBD ± VitE was used to
generate protein lysates for western blot with the indicated antibodies. (d) Quantification of NRF2 levels using densitometry shows that relative to p84 (control), nuclear levels of
NRF2 are enhanced by CBD treatment. (e) GSCs were transfected using the Qiagen Cignal Antioxidant Luciferase Reporter Kit (Qiagen Inc, Valencia, CA, USA; no. CCS-5020L)
and Lipofectamine 2000 (Life Technologies) in OptiMEM media and 1% NEAA. At 24 h after transfection, the cells were treated with vehicle, 2.0 μM CBD, 2.0 μM CBD+40 μM
VitE or DL-sulforapahane (40 μM) the manufacturer’s recommended positive control for 48 h. NRF2 activity was measured using the Promega Dual-GLO Luciferase Assay system
(Promega Corporation, Sunnyvale, CA, USA). First, NRF2-dependent luminescence was measured and then constitutively expressed luminescence was measured to normalize
for cell number. The plotted luminescence units are a ratio of the two readings. Data were compared using a one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with a corresponding
Dunnett’s post hoc test. *,#Statistically significant differences from control and CBD at Po0.05, respectively. (f) IHC detection of NRF2 and SLC7A11 (xCT) in GBM xenograft
tissues from mice treated with vehicle or CBD for 22 days. Bar = 200 μm
ROS mediate glioblastoma response to therapy
E Singer et al
7
Cell Death and Disease
combination of PE and CBD on GSC 387 viability and our
results demonstrate that the two drugs act synergistically
to inhibit tumor cell viability (Supplementary Figure 6).
Supplementary Table 1 summarizes combination index (CI)
values for CBD and various system Xc inhibitors in inhibiting
GSC survival, where a CI value of o1, 1 and 41 indicates
synergistic, additive and antagonistic effects, respectively.
Discussion
To study the response of GSC to a redox therapeutic that
stimulates ROS, we used the non-toxic, non-psychoactive
cannabinoid, CBD. CBD has been previously shown to inhibit
GBM progression in subcutaneous and intracranial models
representing bulk tumor mass.14,23,24 CBD has also been
shown to inhibit the progression of other cancers in vivo.25–28
The most unifying mode of action in culture for these effects
has been the selective production of ROS in tumor cells as
opposed to non-transformed cells.11 However, whether the
ability of CBD to inhibit cancer aggressive through the
production of ROS in culture is linked to the antitumor activity
of CBD in vivo has not been established.
In this investigation, CBD-dependent inhibition of GSC
viability in culture was mediated by an increase in the production
of ROS, which could be reverted by the antioxidant VitE.
CBD-induced therapeutic benefit can be attributed, in part,
to the inhibition of GSC self-renewal and stemness as shown
by functional assays and biomarker analyses in xenograft
tissues. Our results confirm the recent report that p-p38
activation underlies ROS-mediated reprogramming of GSCs29
and furthermore show for the first time that stem cell key
regulators such as Id1, Sox2 and p-STAT3 are inhibited by
CBD in an ROS-dependent manner. These findings are
relevant in the context of using CBD as adjuvant therapy for
GBM, to complement the standard of care (e.g., Temodar,
radiation), which is not efficacious against GSCs.30
CBD was able to inhibit GBM progression in vivo and
prolonged survival. IHC analysis of tumor tissue demonstrated
CBD-dependent inhibition of cancer cell proliferation and
induction of apoptosis, as assessed by decreased Ki67 and
increased cleaved caspase-3 staining, respectively. Overall,
however, the inhibitory effects on GSC progression in vivo
were not as robust as when using standard glioma lines such
as U8723 and U25113 cells. This provided us with an excellent
opportunity to understand GSC adaptive changes to a redox
therapeutic.
Using DNA microarrays, we interrogated changes occurring
in GSCs following CBD treatment. Data analysis demon-
strated that CBD significantly inhibited the expression of stem
cell regulators and GBM PN markers, with a concomitant
upregulation of antioxidant response gene products and MES
markers. Using western blot assays, we discovered that
induction of the antioxidant response and the MES phenotype
were both reversible by antioxidant pretreatment, suggesting a
Figure 6
ERA and PE inhibit GSC viability in an iron-dependent manner. (a and c) GSCs 387 were treated with μM concentrations of ERA or PE for 5 days and the
percentage of cell viability was calculated as the Dojindo reagent product absorbance in the treated cells/control cells × 100. (b) GSC 387 were treated with indicated μM
concentrations of ERA ± DFO, Fer or VitE, as indicated. (d) GSC 387 was treated with shown μM concentrations of PE ± DFO, Fer or VitE. (e) Taqman determination of PTGS2
levels after GSC 387 treatment with PE ± VitE and DFO. *Po0.02 ANOVA
ROS mediate glioblastoma response to therapy
E Singer et al
8
Cell Death and Disease
dependence on ROS. More specifically, we measured the
activation of a critical antioxidant response element (ARE)
activator, NRF2. Upon sensing of increase ROS levels, NRF2 is
released from its complex with KEAP1, and it translocates to the
nucleus, where it binds ARE found in the promoters of ROS-
detoxifying enzymes, including NQO1, GST, HMOX-1 and
xCT.18,31 Importantly, augmented expression of both NRF2 and
xCT was observed in vivo in CBD-treated tumor tissue, as
compared with vehicle. This demonstrates for the first time that
CBD targeting of GSC results in the activation of pathways
responsible for counteracting oxidative stress in vivo.
Cysteine metabolism, regulated by xCT, is a critical
determinant of GBM growth and invasion. Interestingly, recent
studies have identified xCT as a key regulator of cancer cell
Figure 7
CBD and ERA synergistically inhibit GSC viability, invasion and self-renewal. (a and b) GSC lines 387 and 3832 were treated with CBD, ERA or CBD+ERA (μM).
Viability (%) was calculated as the Dojindo reagent product absorbance in the treated cells/control cells × 100. These data were used to calculate a CI value (0.53 and 0.49 for
GSC 387, and 0.89 and 0.85 for GSC 3832) for the two combined concentrations in each group, where a CI value of o1, 1 and 41 indicates synergistic, additive and
antagonistic effects, respectively (see also Supplementary Table 1). (c and d) ROS measurements show the combination of CBD+ERA (μM) enhanced ROS production in the
3832 and 387 GSC lines. ROS was measured using 2′,7′dichloro-dihydrofluorescein and cell flow cytometry. The % increase in ROS was calculated as the FL2 emission shift in
treated cells/vehicle cells × 100. (e and f) Invasion assays were performed using GSC 387, GSC 3832 in the presence of vehicle, CBD, ERA and combination of CBD+ERA (μM).
Invasion (%) was calculated as the number of cells invading in the treated cells/control cells × 100. Data were compared using a one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with a
corresponding Dunnett’s post hoc test. *Statistically significant differences from control at Po0.05. (g and h) Limited dilution assays were performed using 3832 and 387 GSCs
cultured in three decreasing cell densities. Inhibitors were added at the time of initial culturing (CBD = 1.5 μM, ERA = 5 μM). The number of wells with spheres was recorded
10 days following initial culturing and data were analyzed using ELDA software. The plot represents analysis for 387 cells; the chart includes estimated (median) stem cell
frequency for both GSC lines in the presence of CBD, ERA and CBD+ERA (μM) as indicated. Overall test for stem cell frequency between any of the groups shown in (g and h)
had a P-value of 2.2e −5
ROS mediate glioblastoma response to therapy
E Singer et al
9
Cell Death and Disease
metabolic reprogramming and therapeutic target in gastric
cancer and in triple-negative breast carcinomas.32,33 In this
study, we explored the utility of small-molecule inhibitors of
xCT as antiglioma agents. SAS, previously used in other
published reports,19 exhibited limited antitumor activity as
monotherapy, and acted in an additive manner with CBD.
Because of its low potency and limited solubility, combination
experiments in xenograft models could not be performed. We
next tested a new generation of system Xc inhibitors, ERA and
PE. ERA has been identified through a screen for small
molecules efficacious against Ras-driven cancers and mod-
ulates intracellular levels of GSH and ROS.34 This is the first
study to report the activity of ERA against primary GSCs. In
other cancers, cell killing by ERA occurs as a novel iron-
dependent, cellular death mechanism, which is named as
ferroptosis.21
Our
studies
using
specific
iron
chelators
demonstrate that in GBM cells, ERA works akin to inhibition
of other cancers. As ERA has low solubility in organic solvents,
PE has been recently synthesized and characterized as an
alternative to ERA for targeting tumor cells.21 We showed that
PE is efficacious against GBM cells and this effect can be
partially reverted by iron chelators. Importantly, both ERA and
PE act synergistically with CBD to inhibit viability of GSC.
However, unlike the case of flank tumors, PE does not cross
the blood–brain barrier and as such was not suitable for in vivo
testing in our orthotopic GBM model. Novel PE derivatives with
better
blood
barrier
penetrance
and
alternate
delivery
approaches are currently under investigation.
Our data presented herein demonstrates for the first time
that administration of CBD can inhibit intracranial growth of
primary GSC-derived tumors in vivo and this effect is mediated
by an increase in ROS levels. Our results support the notion
that
CB-based
therapeutics
in
combination
with
other
non-toxic small-molecule inhibitors of antioxidant response
genes can synergistically inhibit GBM progression and should
be considered for the development of novel therapeutics.
The diagram in Figure 8 summarizes adaptive signaling
pathways modulated by CBD via ROS up-regulation in glioma
stem cells.
Materials and Methods
Cell lines and reagents. The U251 cell line was obtained from ATCC
(Manassas, VA, USA). GSC lines 387 and 3832 were generously provided by Dr
Jeremy Rich, while all other GSC lines used were generated in-house from tissue
samples obtained during surgical resection of patients diagnosed with GBM, using an
IRB-approved protocol. Tumors were then subjected to enzymatic digest, mechanically
dissociated and cultured as neurospheres as previously described by our group. Tumor
lines were maintained as subcutaneous flank xenografts in athymic Nu/Nu mice and
processed as stated above. All GSC lines were cultured in growth media made up of
Neurobasal Media (Lifetech, Chicago, IL, USA) supplemented with N2 (Lifetech),
GlutMAX (Lifetech), basic fibroblast growth factor and epidermal growth factor, both at
25 μg/ml (Promega Corp., Madison, WI, USA), unless stated otherwise. CBD was
obtained from the National Institutes of Health through the National Institute of Drug
Abuse. Ethanol served as the vehicle control in all culture studies. Tocopherol (TOC;
Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), SAS (Sigma-Aldrich), Fer (Sigma-Aldrich), DFO
(Abcam Ltd, Boston, MA, USA) and ERA (Selleck Chemicals, Houston, TX, USA) were
all obtained commercially from indicated vendors. PE was generously donated by Dr.
Brent Stockwell (Columbia University, New York, NY, USA).
Cellular ROS detection using flow cytometry. ROS measurements
were made by plating GBM cells at 0.175 × 106 cells per well in 6-well plates
precoated with GelTrex Reduced Growth Factor Basement Membrane Matrix (Life
Technologies, Grand Island, NY, USA) for 3 h at 0.04–0.06 mg/ml (dependent on the
manufacturer’s stated concentration range). Cells were allowed to recover overnight.
At 24 h, media were aspirated and replaced with fresh growth media lacking
GlutMAX (Lifetech) and supplemented with indicated drug concentrations and the
addition of 2′-7′ dichlorofluorescein diacetate (DCF; Sigma-Aldrich) at 10 μM.
Cultures were incubated with treatment media for 12 h, harvested with TrypLE
Express (Lifetech), resuspended in 300 μl PBS and ROS was assessed by cell flow
cytometry. Representative histogram plots were made using FlowJo software (Tree
Star Inc., Ashland, OR, USA).
Expression profiling using Human Gene 1.0 ST Affymetrix
Arrays. Affymetrix Human Gene 1.0 ST arrays were processed according to
the Affymetrix Expression Analysis Whole Transcript (WT) Sense Target Labeling
Protocol (Affymetrix, Inc.). Briefly, total RNA (300 ng) was converted to double-
strand cDNA. cRNA was obtained by an in vitro transcription reaction and used as
the template for generating a new first-strand cDNA. The cDNA was fragmented,
end-labeled with biotin and hybridized to the array for 16 h at 45 °C using the
GeneChip Hybridization Oven 640 (Affymetrix, Inc.). Washing and staining with
streptavidin–phycoerythrin was performed using the GeneChip Fluidics Station 450
and the images acquired using the Affymetrix Scanner 3000 7G Plus (Affymetrix,
Inc.). The data were normalized using quantile normalization with the RMA
algorithm for gene-level intensities and the ratio determined for each gene using
Partek Genomics Suite (Partek Inc., St. Louis, MO, USA). Total RNA was processed
at the microarray facility from the center for applied genomics at Public Health
Research Institute in New Jersey, using the Affymetrix Gene 1.0 ST Array.
Human affymetrix data analysis. Mean values of selected human and
HCMV transcripts in the IE1KD versus Control are displayed using the R program
heatmap.2 from the package ‘gplots’. The package is available from the R repository
CRAN, and is maintained by Gregory R. Warnes. Raw data is available at
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE57978.
Additional analyses were performed using AltAnalyze software developed by Dr Nathan
Salomonis and Ingenuity analysis software (Ingenuity IPA, Redwood City, CA, USA).
Limited dilution assays and sphere formation. CD133+ cells from
primary GSC lines maintained on the flank of nude mice were plated in 96-well
plates at 10, 100 and 1000 cells per well (12 wells/condition) in complete growth
media. Cells were retrieved after sorting using MACS directly in Neurobasal media
+growth factors and inhibitors were added directly to cells at the time of initial
culturing. Tumorspheres were evaluated 10 days following initial culturing, using an
inverted microscope fitted with a camera. Wells were scored positive when at least
one sphere was present. The estimated stem cell frequency was estimated using
the ELDA. For percent sphere formation, 100 GSCs were plated per well of a
24 well plate and sphere formation (at 7 days) was calculated using the following
formula: percent sphere formation (%) = number of spheres/number of cells
plated × 100. Each condition was run in quadruplicate and the experiment was
repeated two times.
Figure 8
Diagram summarizes adaptive signaling pathways activated by CBD
via ROS upregulation (PMT and antioxidant response, both reversible) in GSCs.
Cotargeting using CBD and system Xc (xCT) inhibitors synergistically inhibit GSC
viability. The diagram was produced using the Ingenuity Pathway Analysis software
ROS mediate glioblastoma response to therapy
E Singer et al
10
Cell Death and Disease
Orthotopic mouse model of GBM. Tumors were generated in female
athymic nu/nu mice by the intracranial injection of luciferase-labeled GSC 3832
or 387 in 4 μl of RPMI. Treatments were started at day 9 (arrow) following
bioluminescence imaging (BLI) confirmation of tumor presence (using IVIS Lumina
instrument, Perkin Elmer, Santa Clara, CA, USA) and randomization of mice.
Starting on day 9, CBD was administered intraperitoneally 5 days a week until
completion of the experiment. Animal health was monitored daily, and when mice
showed signs of disease progression, they were humanely killed in accordance with
institutional IACUC guidelines.
Data analysis and statistical procedures. All data shown represents two
independent experiments with ≥3 replicates. The IC50 values with corresponding 95%
confidence limits were compared by the analysis of logged data (GraphPad Prism;
Graphpad Software Inc., La Jolla, CA, USA). Significant differences were also
determined using a one-way ANOVA or the unpaired Student’s t-test, where suitable.
Survival data was evaluated using Kaplan–Meir curves and a log-rank Mantel–Cox
test. P-values o0.05 defined statistical significance. Statistical significance was
assessed using GraphPad Prism (Graphpad Software Inc.).
Conflict of Interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements. We are grateful to Dr. Charles Cobbs (The Ivy Center
for Brain Tumor Research, Swedish Hospital, Seattle, WA, USA) for providing
glioblastoma tissues and to Dr. Jeremy Rich (Cleveland Clinic, Clevelan, OH, USA)
for the GSC lines 387 and 3832. We thank Dr. Brent Stockwell (Columbia University)
for providing PE. This work was supported by NIH Grants R21NS067395 (LS),
R01NS070289 (LS, CSC), and additional funding from the Flaming foundation, the
ABC2 foundation and the CPMC Research Institute.
1. Phillips HS, Kharbanda S, Chen R, Forrest WF, Soriano RH, Wu TD et al. Molecular
subclasses of high-grade glioma predict prognosis, delineate a pattern of disease
progression, and resemble stages in neurogenesis. Cancer Cell 2006; 9: 157–173.
2. TCGA C. Comprehensive genomic characterization defines human glioblastoma genes and
core pathways. Nature 2008; 455: 1061–1068.
3. Verhaak RG, Hoadley KA, Purdom E, Wang V, Qi Y, Wilkerson MD et al. Integrated genomic
analysis identifies clinically relevant subtypes of glioblastoma characterized by abnormalities
in PDGFRA, IDH1, EGFR, and NF1. Cancer Cell 2010; 17: 98–110.
4. Verhaak RG, Tamayo P, Yang JY, Hubbard D, Zhang H, Creighton CJ et al. Prognostically
relevant gene signatures of high-grade serous ovarian carcinoma. J Clin Invest 2012; 123:
517–525.
5. Bhat KP, Balasubramaniyan V, Vaillant B, Ezhilarasan R, Hummelink K, Hollingsworth F et al.
Mesenchymal differentiation mediated by NF-kappaB promotes radiation resistance in
glioblastoma. Cancer Cell 2013; 24: 331–346.
6. Mao P, Joshi K, Li J, Kim SH, Li P, Santana-Santos L et al. Mesenchymal glioma stem cells
are maintained by activated glycolytic metabolism involving aldehyde dehydrogenase 1A3.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2013; 110: 8644–8649.
7. Bao S, Wu Q, McLendon RE, Hao Y, Shi Q, Hjelmeland AB et al. Glioma stem cells promote
radioresistance by preferential activation of the DNA damage response. Nature 2006; 444:
756–760.
8. Benhar M, Engelberg D, Levitzki A. ROS, stress-activated kinases and stress signaling
in cancer. EMBO Rep 2002; 3: 420–425.
9. Wondrak
GT.
Redox-directed
cancer
therapeutics:
molecular
mechanisms
and
opportunities. Antioxid Redox Signal 2009; 11: 3013–3069.
10. Laurent A, Nicco C, Chereau C, Goulvestre C, Alexandre J, Alves A et al. Controlling tumor
growth by modulating endogenous production of reactive oxygen species. Cancer Res 2005;
65: 948–956.
11. Massi P, Solinas M, Cinquina V, Parolaro D. Cannabidiol as potential anticancer drug.
Br J Clin Pharmacol 2012; 75: 303–312.
12. Velasco G, Sanchez C, Guzman M. Towards the use of cannabinoids as antitumour agents.
Nat Rev Cancer 2012; 12: 436–444.
13. Akhavan A, Griffith OL, Soroceanu L, Leonoudakis D, Luciani-Torres MG, Daemen A et al.
Loss of cell-surface laminin anchoring promotes tumor growth and is associated with poor
clinical outcomes. Cancer Res 2012; 72: 2578–2588.
14. Soroceanu L, Murase R, Limbad C, Singer E, Allison J, Adrados I et al. Id-1 is a key
transcriptional regulator of glioblastoma aggressiveness and a novel therapeutic target.
Cancer Res 2013; 73: 1559–1569.
15. Hu Y, Smyth GK. ELDA: extreme limiting dilution analysis for comparing depleted and
enriched populations in stem cell and other assays. J Immunol Methods 2009; 347:
70–78.
16. Shi X, Zhang Y, Zheng J, Pan J. Reactive oxygen species in cancer stem cells. Antioxid
Redox Signal 2012; 16: 1215–1228.
17. Lu KV, Chang JP, Parachoniak CA, Pandika MM, Aghi MK, Meyronet D et al. VEGF inhibits
tumor cell invasion and mesenchymal transition through a MET/VEGFR2 complex. Cancer
Cell 2012; 22: 21–35.
18. Magesh S, Chen Y, Hu L. Small molecule modulators of Keap1-Nrf2-ARE pathway as
potential preventive and therapeutic agents. Med Res Rev 2012; 32: 687–726.
19. Lyons SA, Chung WJ, Weaver AK, Ogunrinu T, Sontheimer H. Autocrine glutamate signaling
promotes glioma cell invasion. Cancer Res 2007; 67: 9463–9471.
20. Dixon SJ, Lemberg KM, Lamprecht MR, Skouta R, Zaitsev EM, Gleason CE et al.
Ferroptosis: an iron-dependent form of nonapoptotic cell death. Cell 2012; 149:
1060–1072.
21. Dixon SJ, Patel DN, Welsch M, Skouta R, Lee ED, Hayano M et al. Pharmacological
inhibition of cystine-glutamate exchange induces endoplasmic reticulum stress and
ferroptosis. Elife 2014; 3: e02523.
22. Yang WS, SriRamaratnam R, Welsch ME, Shimada K, Skouta R, Viswanathan VS et al.
Regulation of ferroptotic cancer cell death by GPX4. Cell 2014; 156: 317–331.
23. Massi P, Vaccani A, Ceruti S, Colombo A, Abbracchio MP, Parolaro D. Antitumor effects of
cannabidiol, a nonpsychoactive cannabinoid, on human glioma cell lines. J Pharmacol Exp
Ther 2004; 308: 838–845.
24. Massi P, Valenti M, Vaccani A, Gasperi V, Perletti G, Marras E et al. 5-Lipoxygenase
and anandamide hydrolase (FAAH) mediate the antitumor activity of cannabidiol,
a non-psychoactive cannabinoid. J Neurochem 2008; 104: 1091–1100.
25. De Petrocellis L, Ligresti A, Schiano Moriello A, Iappelli M, Verde R, Stott CG et al. Non-THC
cannabinoids inhibit prostate carcinoma growth in vitro and in vivo: pro-apoptotic effects and
underlying mechanisms. Br J Pharmacol 2012; 168: 79–102.
26. McKallip RJ, Jia W, Schlomer J, Warren JW, Nagarkatti PS, Nagarkatti M. Cannabidiol-
induced apoptosis in human leukemia cells: a novel role of cannabidiol in the regulation of
p22phox and Nox4 expression. Mol Pharmacol 2006; 70: 897–908.
27. Murase R, Kawamura R, Singer E, Pakdel A, Sarma P, Judkins J et al. Targeting multiple
cannabinoid anti-tumour pathways with a resorcinol derivative leads to inhibition of advanced
stages of breast cancer. Br J Pharmacol 2014; 171: 4464–4477.
28. Ramer R, Bublitz K, Freimuth N, Merkord J, Rohde H, Haustein M et al. Cannabidiol inhibits
lung cancer cell invasion and metastasis via intercellular adhesion molecule-1. FASEB J
2012; 26: 1535–1548.
29. Sato A, Okada M, Shibuya K, Watanabe E, Seino S, Narita Y et al. Pivotal role for ROS
activation of p38 MAPK in the control of differentiation and tumor-initiating capacity of glioma-
initiating cells. Stem Cell Res 2014; 12: 119–131.
30. Hegi ME, Diserens AC, Gorlia T, Hamou MF, de Tribolet N, Weller M et al. MGMT
gene silencing and benefit from temozolomide in glioblastoma. N Engl J Med 2005; 352:
997–1003.
31. Savaskan NE, Eyupoglu IY. xCT modulation in gliomas: relevance to energy metabolism and
tumor microenvironment normalization. Ann Anat 2010; 192: 309–313.
32. Ishimoto T, Nagano O, Yae T, Tamada M, Motohara T, Oshima H et al. CD44 variant
regulates redox status in cancer cells by stabilizing the xCT subunit of system xc(-) and
thereby promotes tumor growth. Cancer Cell 2011; 19: 387–400.
33. Timmerman LA, Holton T, Yuneva M, Louie RJ, Padro M, Daemen A et al. Glutamine
sensitivity analysis identifies the xCT antiporter as a common triple-negative breast tumor
therapeutic target. Cancer Cell 2013; 24: 450–465.
34. Dixon SJ, Stockwell BR. The role of iron and reactive oxygen species in cell death. Nat Chem
Biol 2013; 10: 9–17.
Cell Death and Disease is an open-access journal
published by Nature Publishing Group. This work is
licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International
Licence. The images or other third party material in this article are
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated
otherwise in the credit line; if the material is not included under the
Creative Commons licence, users will need to obtain permission from
the licence holder to reproduce the material. To view a copy of this
licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0
Supplementary Information accompanies this paper on Cell Death and Disease website (http://www.nature.com/cddis)
ROS mediate glioblastoma response to therapy
E Singer et al
11
Cell Death and Disease
