Cannabidiol Treatment Results in a Common Gene
Expression Response Across Aggressive Cancer
Cells from Various Origins
Pierre-Yves Desprez,1,* Ryuichi Murase,1 Chandani Limbad,1 Rinette W.L. Woo,1 Isabel Adrados,1 Klemens Weitenthaler,1
Liliana Soroceanu,1 Nathan Salomonis,2 and Sean D. McAllister1
Abstract
Background: We previously reported that cannabidiol (CBD), a cannabinoid with a low toxicity proﬁle, down-
regulated the expression of the prometastatic gene inhibitor of DNA binding 1 (ID1) in cancer cells, leading
to inhibition of tumor progression in vivo. While CBD is broadly used, including in the self-medication of cancer
patients, and CBD-based therapies are undergoing clinical evaluation for cancer treatment, its mechanisms of
action are still poorly understood.
Methods: In this study, using microarray analysis and Western blot analysis for validation, we attempted to iden-
tify the full spectrum of genes regulated by CBD across various aggressive cancer cell lines, including the breast,
brain, head and neck, and prostate.
Results: We conﬁrmed that ID1 was a major target downregulated by CBD and also discovered that CBD
inhibited FOXM1 (Forkhead box M1), a transcriptional activator involved in cell proliferation, while simultaneously
upregulating GDF15 (growth differentiation factor 15), a cytokine associated with tissue differentiation.
Conclusion: Our results suggest that, by modulating expression of shared key cancer-driving genes, CBD could
represent a promising nontoxic therapeutic for treating tumors of various origins.
Keywords: microarray analysis; transcription; cannabinoid; ID1; FOXM1; GDF15; Western blot; short hairpin RNA;
metastasis
Introduction
Inhibitor of DNA binding (ID) helix-loop-helix (HLH)
proteins are negative regulators of basic HLH (bHLH)
transcription factors, and many reports now show that
the ID family of HLH proteins controls cellular pro-
cesses related to tumor progression.1 We found that re-
ducing ID1 using antisense technology led to signiﬁcant
reductions in cancer cell proliferation and invasiveness
in culture and metastasis in vivo in various types of can-
cer.2–5 Furthermore, ID1 overexpression in breast can-
cer cells was also found to be one of the most
signiﬁcant genes within a gene signature set that is cor-
related with the propensity of primary human breast
cancer cells to metastasize to the lung.6 Reducing ID1
expression could provide a rational therapeutic strategy
for the treatment of aggressive human cancers. It is not
possible at this point, however, to use antisense technol-
ogy in human patients. In our search for a nontoxic ex-
ogenous compound that could inhibit ID1 expression, a
potential candidate agent, cannabidiol (CBD), was
found.7
The endocannabinoid system was discovered through
research focusing on the primary psychoactive active
component of Cannabis sativa, D9-tetrahydrocannabinol
(D9-THC), and other synthetic cannabinoids.8,9 D9-THC
and additional cannabinoid agonists have been shown to
interact with two G-protein coupled receptors, CB1 and
CB2.8,9 More studies demonstrate that CB1 and CB2
1California Paciﬁc Medical Center, Research Institute, San Francisco, California, USA.
2Division of Biomedical Informatics, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.
*Address correspondence to: Pierre-Yves Desprez, California Paciﬁc Medical Center, Research Institute, 475 Brannan Street, Suite 130, San Francisco, CA 94107, USA,
E-mail: pydesprez@cpmcri.org
Cannabis and Cannabinoid Research
Volume 6, Number 2, 2021
ª Mary Ann Liebert, Inc.
DOI: 10.1089/can.2019.0081
148
receptor agonists show promise as tumor inhibitors.10
However, the psychotropic effects of D9-THC and addi-
tional cannabinoid agonists, mediated through the CB1
receptor, limit their clinical utility.9 In addition to
D9-THC, CBD is also present in appreciable quantities
in C. sativa and does not have appreciable afﬁnity for
CB1 or CB2 receptors or psychotropic activities.11
However, GPR55, a putative receptor for CBD, has
been characterized.12
Even though we have shown that CBD inhibits can-
cer cell aggressiveness in various types of cancer
through the downregulation of ID1 gene expression,
no in-depth transcriptomic analysis has been pub-
lished to date. Beyond the decrease in ID1 gene ex-
pression, there is no clear mechanism(s) that could
explain the antitumor activity of CBD in so many
types of cancer cells. Using an unbiased microarray anal-
ysis, we identiﬁed a CBD-induced gene expression pro-
ﬁle consistent across four different cancer types, which
include key regulators of tumor cell proliferation and in-
vasion. We not only conﬁrm downregulation of ID1
gene expression as a common mechanism of CBD action
across various types of cancer but also identify additional
genes, such as the transcription factor Forkhead box M1
(FOXM1), as a mediator of CBD antiproliferative effects.
Even though CBD is broadly used for various diseases
including cancer, its mechanisms of action are still
poorly understood. We suggest that regulation of a spe-
ciﬁc set of genes by CBD leads to inhibition of human
cancer cell proliferation, migration, and invasiveness,
thus providing some mechanisms for the antimetastatic
activity of the compound.
Materials and Methods
Cell culture and treatments
We used the human breast cancer cell lines MDA-
MB231 and MDA-MB436 (ATCC), human glioblastoma
(GBM) U251 and SF126 (ATCC), human oral squamous
cell carcinoma SAS and human salivary gland cancer cell
line ACCM (Japanese Collection of Research Bioresour-
ces), and human prostate cancer cell lines PC3 and
DU145 (ATCC). In all experiments, the different cell
populations were ﬁrst cultured in RPMI-1640 media
containing 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS). On the ﬁrst
day of treatment, the media were replaced with vehicle
control (Veh) (ethanol) or CBD (2 lM) in RPMI and
0.1% FBS as previously reported.7,9 The media with the
appropriate compounds were replaced after 24 h, for a
total of 2-day treatment, a time corresponding to signif-
icant effects of CBD as previously reported in time-
course experiments by our laboratory.7 CBD was
obtained from the National Institutes of Health (NIH)
through the National Institute of Drug Abuse.
Microarray analysis
To evaluate genome-wide changes in gene expression,
cancer cell lines were obtained from breast, GBM,
head and neck (HN), and prostate (as described previ-
ously). Total RNA was extracted from these cell lines
using TRIzol (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) and hybrid-
ized as technical replicates to Agilent Human Whole
Genome OneArray Microarrays by Phalanx Biotech
Group, Inc. (Hsinchu, Taiwan).13 A total of 12,712
genes with a minimum detection p-value of <0.05 in
at least one sample were retained for further analysis.
Given the inherent gene expression variation between
cell lines, we normalized gene expression changes within
a cell line between treatment and vehicle. To normalize
each gene expression value, the log2 mean of each treat-
ment and control sample was subtracted from individual
values, resulting in positive and negative log2-folds. Nor-
malized log2-fold changes for all treatment and control
samples were then compared using an empirical Bayes
moderated t-test in AltAnalyze version 2.0.814 between
all CBD-treated and vehicle-treated lines. Genes with a
false discovery rate-adjusted p-value of <0.05 and fold
change >2 were analyzed using the GO-Elite module15
in AltAnalyze to identify and visualize enriched biologi-
cal pathways, ontologies, and gene-sets. Clustering was
performed in AltAnalyze using the HOPACH algorithm
via remote connection to R.16
Knockdown experiments
Human PC3 prostate cancer cells were infected with
control short hairpin RNA (Ctl shRNA) or with
shRNA
against
growth
differentiation
factor
15
(GDF15 shRNA) purchased as lentiviral particles (sc-
39798-V; Santa Cruz Biotechnology), selected with pu-
romycin and pooled.
Western analysis
Cells were scraped, lysed, and the protein extracts were
separated by sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis using 10% acrylamide gels and blot-
ted onto nitrocellulose membranes. Spectra Multicolor
Broad Range Protein Ladder was from Thermo Scien-
tiﬁc and included 10 recombinant proteins (10, 17, 26,
34, 42, 52, 72, 95, 140, and 260 kDa). After blocking,
blots were hybridized with rabbit monoclonal anti-
GENES REGULATED BY CANNABIDIOL
149
ID1 (BCH-1#195–14; Biocheck), mouse monoclonal
anti-FOXM1 (A-11/sc-271746; Santa Cruz Biotechnol-
ogy), goat polyclonal anti-GDF15 (AF957; R&D Sys-
tems), as well as anti-actin (Chemicon), diluted in
Tris–HCl buffer saline pH 7.6–0.1% Tween 20+ 10%
nonfat dry milk. Membranes were incubated with horse-
radish peroxidase-labeled secondary antibodies, and the
signal was detected using enhanced chemiluminescence.
Band intensity values were obtained directly from the
blot using AlphaeaseFC software (San Leandro, CA) or
from ﬁlm using the ImageJ (NIH, MD).
Results
CBD downregulates ID1 gene expression
in various types of cancer
We previously demonstrated that CBD inhibited tumor
cancer cell proliferation and invasion in various types
of cancer.17 Even though the decrease in ID1 expres-
sion seemed to be necessary for the majority of effects
of CBD on metastatic progression,7,18 we could not rule
out that other important transcriptional regulators of
tumor aggressiveness would be modulated by CBD.
Therefore, we used eight different human cancer cells
lines, two breast cancer cell lines (MDA-MB231 and
MDA-MB436), two GBM lines (U251 and SF126),
two HN cancer lines (oral squamous cell carcinoma
SAS and salivary gland cancer cell line ACCM), and
two prostate cancer lines (PC3 and DU145). Following
a 48-h CBD treatment, RNA and protein were harvested
from the same plate for all cell lines. Western blot anal-
ysis of ID1 was performed to conﬁrm the downregula-
tion of protein expression by CBD (Fig. 1A–D). RNA
samples were collected for microarray analysis as
described below.
CBD treatment results in a common gene expression
response across multiple cancers
To identify an optimal set of CBD-responsive genes
and pathways, we performed genome-wide expression
proﬁling on the eight aggressive cancer cell lines
(breast, GBM, HN, and prostate) with and without
CBD treatment. When treatments and controls within
each cell line were normalized to themselves, the gene
expression differences between CBD and vehicle were
FIG. 1.
CBD inhibits ID1 gene expression in human cancer cell lines from various origins. Proteins from
(A) two breast cancer cell lines MDA-MB231 and MDA-MB436, (B) two GBM U251 and SF126, (C) two tumor
types in the HN region (oral squamous cell carcinoma SAS and salivary gland cancer cell line ACCM), and
(D) two prostate cancer cell lines PC3 and DU145 were extracted and analyzed for ID1 by Western blot analysis
as described in the Materials and Methods section. Cells were treated either with Veh or with CBD.
Normalization was carried out by stripping the blots and re-probing with an anti-actin antibody. For each cell
line, a representative experiment from three to ﬁve independent experiments is shown, and some of the bands
were cropped from the original blots. CBD, cannabidiol; GBM, glioblastoma; HN, head and neck; Veh, vehicle
control.
150
DESPREZ ET AL.
largely consistent between tumors of distinct origins.
The majority of regulated genes were decreased upon
CBD treatment following stringent ﬁltering of these
data. Importantly, only a few transcriptional regulators
were found among the top 44 most signiﬁcantly down-
regulated genes, including ID1, FOXM1, and ID3
(Fig. 2A). As previously mentioned above, the ID fam-
ily of HLH proteins controls cellular processes related
to tumor progression, including migration and inva-
sion.1 FOXM1 is exclusively expressed in proliferating
cells, controls cell cycle, and is overexpressed in many
types of cancer.19 We also examined the Gene Ontol-
ogy pathways that were modulated upon CBD treat-
ment. Downregulated genes were largely composed of
factors regulating cell cycle, cell proliferation, DNA
replication, DNA damage, p53 signaling, cholesterol
biosynthesis, Aurora kinase signaling, and transcrip-
tional regulation by FOXM1 and E2F (Fig. 2B).
Examination
of
upregulated
genes
with
CBD
revealed increase in the expression of genes such as
Tribbles Pseudokinase 3 (TRIB3) and GDF15 among
the top 10 most upregulated genes (Fig. 2A) and,
using Gene Ontology, sets of genes corresponding to
inhibitors of angiogenesis and regulators immune re-
sponse (Fig. 2B). TRIB3 is known to be activated as a
result of cellular stress and ultimately leads to
autophagy-mediated cell death, a process implicated
in CB1 and CB2 receptor antitumor activity across can-
cers.10 The characterization of GDF15 as one of the
most upregulated gene is particularly interesting since
its expression has been linked to the inhibition of the
development of some cancers, such as intestinal and
prostate tumors.20 Even though various genes were
found to be regulated upon CBD treatment, we opted
to focus on the regulation of the major transcriptional
regulators, ID1 and FOXM1 genes. We hypothesized
that CBD treatment of cancer cells would lead to inhi-
bition of FOXM1 and ID1 genes expression leading to
inhibition of proliferation and invasion. The downre-
gulation of these genes could be dependent on the
upregulation of GDF15.
GDF15 and FOXM1/ID1 expression in cancer
cells treated with CBD
Using Western blot, we validated GDF15/FOXM1/ID1
protein expression changes in cells treated with CBD
(at 2 lM for 48 h) vs vehicle control (Veh). All cell
lines investigated (human breast cancer cells [MDA-
MB231], human GBM cells [U251], human HN cancer
cells [SAS], and human prostate cancer cells [PC3])
showed the same pattern of expression of these impor-
tant genes (Fig. 3A). GDF15 protein expression was
upregulated, whereas both FOXM1 and ID1 protein
expressions were downregulated across all cancers.
We next asked whether the increase in GDF15 was
linked to the decrease in expression of FOXM1
and/or ID1. To do this, we used a cancer cell line
that could be efﬁciently infected, PC3. We investigated
the effect of GDF15 knockdown on expression of
FOXM1 and ID1 in these prostate cancer cells infected
with a control shRNA (shCtl) or with an shRNA against
GDF15 (shGDF) and treated with either vehicle control
(Veh) or 2 lM CBD (CBD). Using Western blot analysis
from several independent experiments, we conﬁrmed
that GDF15 expression was reduced upon knockdown
and treatment with CBD (Fig. 3B, left panel). We next
determined that this reduction in GDF15 expression
was linked to a reduced effect of CBD on FOXM1 down-
regulation (compare second and fourth samples in
Fig. 3B, center panel). However, the difference between
the decrease in ID1 expression by CBD was not signiﬁ-
cant when comparing shCtl and shGDF cells (second
and fourth samples in Fig. 3B, right panel). These data
suggest that the increase in GDF15 expression upon
treatment with the cannabinoid compound is necessary
for the downregulation of FOXM1 expression, but not
for its effect on ID1 gene expression.
Discussion
In this study, we investigated the expression of genes
that are regulated by the cannabinoid compound
CBD across cancers, focusing on four types of solid
cancers from very different origins. Metastasis is the
ﬁnal and fatal step in the progression of many types
of solid tumors. Currently available therapeutic strate-
gies at this stage of cancer progression are often non-
speciﬁc, have only marginal efﬁcacy, and are highly
toxic. Therapeutic approaches targeting only speciﬁc
mechanisms involved in the development of aggressive
cancers are urgently needed.
It was previously demonstrated that the HLH protein
ID1, an inhibitor of bHLH transcription factors, played a
crucial role during cancer progression.1,21 It was sug-
gested that targeting its expression may be highly effec-
tive and safe in advanced cancer patients, given (1) the
relationship between high ID1 expression levels and ag-
gressive cancer cell behaviors; (2) partial reduction in the
ID1 activity could achieve signiﬁcant outcomes; and (3)
ID1 expression was found to be low in normal adult tis-
sues, thereby eliminating unwanted toxicities generally
GENES REGULATED BY CANNABIDIOL
151
FIG. 2.
CBD-dependent gene expression signatures. (A) Principle component analysis performed in
AltAnalyze on 12,712 genes following normalization in eight cell lines corresponding to four different types of
cancers. The most signiﬁcantly regulated genes between CBD and vehicle treatment were clustered in
AltAnalyze using HOPACH (red, upregulation; green, downregulation). (B) 363 regulated genes (false discovery
rate; p < 0.05, fold >2) between CBD and vehicle treatment, clustered in AltAnalyze using HOPACH (red,
upregulation; green, downregulation). The top unique GO-Elite results are displayed to the right of the
corresponding gene clusters.
152
associated with currently available therapeutic modali-
ties. We reported that CBD could act as an effective in-
hibitor of ID1 expression, leading to inhibition of
genotypic and phenotypic changes that allow aggressive
cancers to invade and metastasize.17 In this study, an un-
biased study of gene expression proﬁling across tumors of
distinct origins conﬁrms that, upon CBD treatment, ID1
was indeed the most strongly inhibited transcriptional
regulator along with FOXM1. In addition, upregulation
of TRIB3, an upstream indicator of autophagy-mediated
cell death, was conserved across cancer types. TRIB3
has previously been implicated in cannabinoid control
of tumor progression.8
Interestingly, even though there are about 2,500
transcriptional regulators in human cells, we only
found three of them (ID1, ID3, and FOXM1) among
the most downregulated genes. Interestingly, we did
not detect any change in the expression of other ID
members, ID2 and ID4. In the case of ID4, our results
are consistent with previous observations that this
HLH protein possesses unique roles compared with
other ID proteins.22 This indicates a high speciﬁcity
of CBD regulation of these transcriptional regulators,
across cancer types. FOXM1 is a transcription factor
exclusively expressed in proliferating cells. It is a pro-
tein of the Forkhead box transcription factor family,
FIG. 3.
GDF15 and FOXM1/ID1 expression in cancer cells. (A) Using Western blotting, GDF15/FOXM1/ID1
expression was compared in cancer cell lines treated (CBD) or not (Veh) for 2 days. Results are presented in
human breast cancer cells (MDA-MB231), human GBM cells (U251), human HN cancer cells (SAS), and human
prostate cancer cells (PC3). For each cell line, a representative experiment from three independent experiments
is shown, and some of the bands were cropped from the original blots. (B) The effects of GDF15 knockdown
were determined on the expression of FOXM1 and ID1 in PC3 prostate cancer cells infected with a control
shRNA (shCtl), or in cells infected with an shRNA against GDF15 (shGDF), and treated either with Veh or with
CBD. Densitometry readings of the blots were taken from independent experiments, and the percentage
relative expression was calculated for GDF15, FOXM1, or ID1. Data were compared using the Student’s t-test.
Error bars, –SEM. p-Values indicate statistically signiﬁcant or nonsigniﬁcant differences. FOXM1, Forkhead box
M1; GDF15, growth differentiation factor 15; shRNA, short hairpin RNA.
GENES REGULATED BY CANNABIDIOL
153
critical for cell cycle progression. FOXM1 activity is
mediated by increased expression of Skp2 and Cks1,
which are important for the processes that drive the
cell cycle from G1 to S phase.19 In normal tissues,
FOXM1 is only expressed in tissues that are regenerat-
ing or in progenitor cells. Studies have shown that
FOXM1 is overexpressed in many human malignancies
and in all human carcinomas. Overexpression of
FOXM1 has been documented in GBM and breast can-
cer. In the latter, it has also been shown to correlate
with a poor prognosis.19 Interestingly, the downregula-
tion of FOXM1 expression by CBD appeared to be, at
least partly, dependent on the upregulation of GDF15
expression.
GDF15 is part of the transformation growth factor
beta superfamily. Its expression is increased in re-
sponse to injuries in various organs such as the kidney
and lung.23 Unlike ID1 and FOXM1, GDF15 has been
linked to tumor suppression. In vivo studies on trans-
genic mice with prostate and intestinal cancer showed
that increased expression of GDF15 inhibited cancer
progression, and several tumor suppressors, such as
EGR-1, GSK-3b, and p53, all upregulate GDF15 ex-
pression.20 Moreover, when cancer cells were treated
with a variety of different antitumor agents, retinoids
or resveratrol, all showed increased expression of
GDF15, suggesting its role as part of a tumor suppress-
ing response.24
Two studies investigated some transcriptomic analy-
ses of CBD in encephalitogenic cells.25,26 The cells used
in the investigations were nontransformed and were
from a different tissue lineage in comparison to the met-
astatic cancer cells presented in our study. However, the
results presented in these two studies showed speciﬁc
effects of CBD on gene expression through alteration
of histone methylation and provides some mechanisms
by which CBD exerts its anti-inﬂammatory effects.
In our studies, CBD could also modify chromatin
remodeling, leading to repression of speciﬁc genes.
The modulation of High Mobility Group Box 2 and
Lamin B1 upon CBD treatment may strengthen this
hypothesis.
Overall, we discovered that key genes modulated by
CBD are conserved across cancer cells from various or-
igins. We conﬁrmed that inhibition of ID genes and
upregulation of TRIB3 are indeed pathways impacted
by CBD treatment in many types of cancer. In addition,
we discovered that the upregulation of GDF15 triggers
reduction in FOXM1 expression, and this may be a key
pathway conserved across cancers, which underlies
CBD-dependent inhibition of cell proliferation. The
net effect of targeting these multiple pathways by a sin-
gle molecule such as CBD could lead to the inhibition
of tumor progression.
Author Disclosure Statement
No competing ﬁnancial interests exist.
Funding Information
This work was supported by grants from the
National Institutes of Health–National Cancer Insti-
tute (CA082548, CA135281) and the Susan Komen
Breast Cancer Research Foundation (KG090385),
and by funds from the Research and Education Lead-
ership Committee of the CPMC Foundation.
References
1. Ke J, Wu R, Chen Y, et al. Inhibitor of DNA binding proteins: implications in
human cancer progression and metastasis. Am J Transl Res. 2018;10:
3887–3910.
2. Murase R, Sumida T, Kawamura R, et al. Suppression of invasion and
metastasis in aggressive salivary cancer cells through targeted inhibition
of ID1 gene expression. Cancer Lett. 2016;377:11–16.
3. Fong S, Itahana Y, Sumida T, et al. Id-1 as a molecular target in therapy for
breast cancer cell invasion and metastasis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003;
100:13543–13548.
4. Soroceanu L, Murase R, Limbad C, et al, Id-1 is a key transcriptional reg-
ulator of glioblastoma aggressiveness and a novel therapeutic target.
Cancer Res. 2013;73:1559–1569.
5. Coppe JP, Itahana Y, Moore DH, et al, Id-1 and Id-2 proteins as molecular
markers for human prostate cancer progression. Clin Cancer Res. 2004;10:
2044–2051.
6. Minn AJ, Gupta GP, Siegel PM, et al, Genes that mediate breast cancer
metastasis to lung. Nature. 2005;436:518–524.
7. McAllister SD, Christian RT, Horowitz MP, et al, Cannabidiol as a novel
inhibitor of Id-1 gene expression in aggressive breast cancer cells. Mol
Cancer Ther. 2007;6:2921–2927.
8. Pertwee RG. Pharmacology of cannabinoid CB1 and CB2 receptors.
Pharmacological Therapeutics. 1997;74(November):129–180.
9. McAllister SD, Murase R, Christian RT, et al. Pathways mediating the ef-
fects of cannabidiol on the reduction of breast cancer cell proliferation,
invasion, and metastasis. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2011;129:37–47.
10. Velasco G, Sanchez C, Guzman M. Towards the use of cannabinoids as
antitumour agents. Nat Rev Cancer. 2012;12:436–444.
11. McPartland JM, Russo EB. Cannabis and cannabis extract: greater than the
sum of the parts? J. Cannabis Therapeut. 2001;1:103–132.
12. Sharir H, Abood ME. Pharmacological characterization of GPR55, a puta-
tive cannabinoid receptor. Pharmacol Ther. 2010;126:301–313.
13. Chang LH, Huang HS, Wu PT, et al. Role of macrophage CCAAT/enhancer
binding protein delta in the pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis in
collagen-induced arthritic mice. PLoS One. 2012;7:e45378.
14. Emig D, Salomonis N, Baumbach J, et al. AltAnalyze and DomainGraph:
analyzing and visualizing exon expression data. Nucleic Acids Res. 2010;
38(Web Server issue):1W755–W762.
15. Zambon AC, Gaj S, Ho I, et al. GO-Elite: a ﬂexible solution for pathway and
ontology over-representation. Bioinformatics. 2012;28:2209–2210.
16. Salomonis N, Cotte N, Zambon AC, et al. Identifying genetic networks
underlying myometrial transition to labor. Genome Biol. 2005;6:R12.
17. McAllister SD. Soroceanu L, Desprez PY. The antitumor activity of plant-
derived non-psychoactive cannabinoids. J Neuroimmune Pharmacol.
2015;10:255–267.
18. Murase R, Kawamura R, Singer E, et al. Targeting multiple cannabinoid
anti-tumour pathways with a resorcinol derivative leads to inhibition of
advanced stages of breast cancer. Br J Pharmacol. 2014;171:4464–4477.
154
DESPREZ ET AL.
19. Raychaudhuri P, Park HJ. FoxM1: a master regulator of tumor metastasis.
Cancer Res. 2011;71:4329–4333.
20. Wang X, Baek SJ, Eling TE. The diverse roles of nonsteroidal anti-
inﬂammatory drug activated gene (NAG-1/GDF15) in cancer. Biochem
Pharmacol. 2013;85:597–606.
21. Nair R, Teo WS, Mittal V, et al. ID proteins regulate diverse aspects of
cancer progression and provide novel therapeutic opportunities. Mol
Ther. 2014;22:1407–1415.
22. Patel D, Morton DJ, Carey J, et al. Inhibitor of differentiation 4 (ID4): from
development to cancer. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015;1855:92–103.
23. Zimmers TA, Jin X, Hsiao EC, et al. Growth differentiation factor-
15/macrophage inhibitory cytokine-1 induction after kidney and lung
injury. Shock. 2005;23:543–548.
24. Martinez JM, Sali T, Okazaki R, et al. Drug-induced expression of nonste-
roidal anti-inﬂammatory drug-activated gene/macrophage inhibitory
cytokine-1/prostate-derived factor, a putative tumor suppressor, inhibits
tumor growth. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2006;318:899–906.
25. Kozela E, Juknat A, Gao F, et al. Pathways and gene networks mediating
the regulatory effects of cannabidiol, a nonpsychoactive cannabinoid, in
autoimmune T cells. J Neuroinﬂammation. 2016;13:136.
26. Yang X, Bam M, Nagarkatti PS, et al. Cannabidiol regulates gene expres-
sion in encephalitogenic T cells using histone methylation and noncod-
ing RNA during experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis. Sci Rep.
2019;9:15780.
Cite this article as: Desprez P-Y, Murase R, Limbad C, Woo RWL,
Adrados I, Weitenthaler K, Soroceanu L, Salomonis N, McAllister SD
(2021) Cannabidiol treatment results in a common gene expression
response across aggressive cancer cells from various origins, Cannabis
and Cannabinoid Research 6:2, 148–155, DOI: 10.1089/can.2019.0081.
Abbreviations Used
bHLH ¼ basic helix-loop-helix
CBD ¼ cannabidiol
FBS ¼ fetal bovine serum
FOXM1 ¼ Forkhead box M1
GBM ¼ glioblastoma
GDF15 ¼ growth differentiation factor 15
HN ¼ head and neck
ID1 ¼ inhibitor of DNA binding 1
shRNA ¼ short hairpin RNA
TRIB3 ¼ Tribbles pseudokinase 3
Veh ¼ vehicle control
D9-THC ¼ D9-tetrahydrocannabinol
GENES REGULATED BY CANNABIDIOL
155
