MOLECULAR CANCER THERAPEUTICS | MODELS AND TECHNOLOGIES
Pan-Cancer Pharmacogenomic Analysis of
Patient-Derived Tumor Cells Using Clinically Relevant
Drug Exposures
Stephen H. Chang1, Ryan J. Ice2, Michelle Chen2, Maxim Sidorov2, Rinette W.L. Woo2,
Aida Rodriguez-Brotons2, Damon Jian2, Han Kyul Kim2, Angela Kim2, David E. Stone2, Ari Nazarian2,
Alyssia Oh2, Gregory J. Tranah2, Mehdi Nosrati2, David de Semir2, Altaf A. Dar2, Pierre-Yves Desprez2,
Mohammed Kashani-Sabet2, Liliana Soroceanu2, and Sean D. McAllister2
ABSTRACT
◥
As a result of tumor heterogeneity and solid cancers harboring
multiple molecular defects, precision medicine platforms in oncol-
ogy are most effective when both genetic and pharmacologic
determinants of a tumor are evaluated. Expandable patient-
derived xenograft (PDX) mouse tumor and corresponding PDX
culture (PDXC) models recapitulate many of the biological and
genetic characteristics of the original patient tumor, allowing for a
comprehensive pharmacogenomic analysis. Here, the somatic
mutations of 23 matched patient tumor and PDX samples encom-
passing four cancers were ﬁrst evaluated using next-generation
sequencing (NGS). 19 antitumor agents were evaluated across 78
patient-derived tumor cultures using clinically relevant drug expo-
sures. A binarization threshold sensitivity classiﬁcation determined
in culture (PDXC) was used to identify tumors that best respond to
drug in vivo (PDX). Using this sensitivity classiﬁcation, logic
models of DNA mutations were developed for 19 antitumor agents
to predict drug response. We determined that the concordance
of somatic mutations across patient and corresponding PDX
samples increased as variant allele frequency increased. Notable
individual PDXC responses to speciﬁc drugs, as well as lineage-
speciﬁc drug responses were identiﬁed. Robust responses identi-
ﬁed in PDXC were recapitulated in vivo in PDX-bearing mice and
logic modeling determined somatic gene mutation(s) deﬁning
response to speciﬁc antitumor agents. In conclusion, combining
NGS of primary patient tumors, high-throughput drug screen
using clinically relevant doses, and logic modeling, can provide
a platform for understanding response to therapeutic drugs tar-
geting cancer.
Introduction
Targeted therapies matched to the speciﬁc molecular proﬁle of a
patient’s tumor have signiﬁcantly improved the efﬁcacy of cancer
treatments and enabled the cancer care personalized medicine revo-
lution (1, 2). Molecular analyses of archived tumor specimens from
patients only reveal a static snapshot of the pathways driving cancer
progression and do not model the real-time dynamic interplay
between the intact tumor and a therapeutic agent. A combination of
next-generation sequencing (NGS) in archived tumor specimens and
determining the therapeutic response in matched live patient-derived
tumor models may therefore provide a more robust platform for
personalizing treatments for patients with advanced cancers (3–8). In
the development of effective personalized therapy platforms for
patients with cancer, research efforts have focused on the use of
patient-derived xenograft (PDX) mouse models, and PDX cultures
(PDXC) created from PDX models. In a pan-cancer study, researchers
compared drug response of 92 patients with response observed in their
corresponding PDX model (9). Their analysis showed that drug
response in PDX models predicted the response in patients 87% of
the time, even as patients underwent several cycles of therapy. This is in
agreement with other studies demonstrating the utility of PDX to
predict the clinical response of the patient (10–13).
The interrogation of multiple drug activities in PDX models
is labor intensive and cost prohibitive, and patient-derived tumor
cells (PDC) are not expandable resources, whereas PDXC offer a
lower cost expandable resource for pharmacogenomic analysis.
Through the California Paciﬁc Medical Center Research Institute
Cancer Avatar Project, we have developed over 300 PDX and
corresponding PDXC models across 9 different types of cancer,
many of which have been tested against multiple drugs in high-
throughput drug screening (HTDS). The HTDS platform evaluates
drug activities against 3-dimensional tumorspheres, and uses clin-
ically relevant drug exposures (14). Pharmacologic data for PDXC
models is also accompanied by corresponding DNA mutational
proﬁles using NGS.
In this investigation, we studied the ﬁdelity of cancer-driving genes
across patient tumor and PDX encompassing multiple cancers. We
also evaluated the concordance of somatic mutations across four
cancers, and found that in all cancers, concordance increases as variant
allele frequency (VAF) increases. Seventy-eight patient-derived tumor
cultures were analyzed for response to 19 antitumor agents. Notable
individual PDXC responses to speciﬁc drugs, as well as lineage speciﬁc
drug responses were identiﬁed, and robust responses identiﬁed in
PDXC were recapitulated in vivo in PDX-bearing mice.
Finally, we used Logic Optimization for Binary Input to Continuous
Output’ (LOBICO) to combine pharmacologic and genomic data to
infer small and easily interpretable logic models that explain drug
sensitivity based on DNA mutational status. We calculated the area
under the curve (AUC) in the sensitivity–speciﬁcity plane to assess
1University of California at San Francisco, School of Pharmacy, Department of
Clinical Pharmacy, San Francisco, California. 2California Paciﬁc Medical Center
Research Institute, San Francisco, California.
Corresponding Authors: Pierre-Yves Desprez, California Paciﬁc Medical Center,
475 Brannan Street, Suite 130, San Francisco, CA 94107. E-mail:
pydesprez@cpmcri.org; and Sean D. McAllister,
sean.david.mcallister@gmail.com
Mol Cancer Ther 2023;22:1100–11
doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-22-0486
2023 American Association for Cancer Research
AACRJournals.org | 1100
Downloaded from http://aacrjournals.org/mct/article-pdf/22/9/1100/3360740/1100.pdf by guest on 28 January 2025
the predictability in drug sensitivity of cell lines based on mutation
status(15).The AUC wasrobustlycalculated for the set oflogicalmodels
of a given maximum complexity using a nested cross-validation
approach. Overall, this study provides a unique pan-cancer phar-
macogenomic analysis using expandable primary patient-derived
tumor models.
Materials and Methods
Generation of PDXs and PDCs
PDCs
Upon receiving human tumor tissue, samples were mechanically
disrupted and cultured as previously described (14, 16). Written
informed consent was obtained from all subjects involved in the study,
which was conducted according to the guidelines of the Declaration of
Helsinki, and approved by the Institutional Review Board of Sutter
Health (protocol code 2015.059–1 approved on 03/10/22).
PDX generation and passaging
PDCs and PDXCs were passaged in vivo as previously
described (14, 16).
HTDS
Development of inhibitor screen
All PDXCs or PDCs were plated in 384-well round bottom micro-
plates (Corning) within 3 to 7 days after processing the original tumor
material or thawing frozen cells. They were then allowed to acclimate
for 3 days for formation of tumorspheres before addition of drugs.
PDXCs were screened as previously described (14) in an HTDS format
against a 6-point concentration–response curve of drugs chosen
primarily based on the following criteria: 1) The drug is FDA-
approved or in clinical trials; 2) The drug is available for research
purposes; 3) Pharmacokinetic (PK) data in humans is available. For
most drugs, the 6-point concentration–response curve contained drug
concentrations beginning with the highest concentration starting with
the approximate maximum plasma concentration (Cmax) reported in
published clinical trials (Supplementary Table S1). In a small percent-
age of drugs in historical screens, where there was signiﬁcant HTDS
data, the concentration was kept as long as it did not vary more than
3-fold of the published Cmax, the exceptions being vorinostat and
gedatolisib which varied by 5- to 10-fold.
Drugs
All compounds tested in this study were obtained through Sell-
eckChem (Houston, TX). The detailed information about the drugs,
including the structure, can be found using the publicly available
search engine on their homepage as well as in the Supplementary
Table S1.
Quantiﬁcation of drug response
The resulting drug-response data were used to calculate area under
the pharmacologic curve (AUC) and corresponding conﬁdence limits
with the program Prism (GraphPad) using the formula ΔX(Y1þY2)/
2 as previously described (14). When taking into consideration
the AUC while testing six drug concentrations, the value is between
0 (complete inhibition of cell viability) and 270 (no effect). A value
greater than 270 represents cell growth.
Growth index
A ﬁxed-interval approach (17), was used based either on CellTiter-
Glo luminescence (indirect measurement of cell number) at the start
(x0) and end of the experiment (xctrl at 72 hours) was obtained. Time
Zero plate contains a single column with cells. Time zero is obtained by
averaging all luminescence values within 95% conﬁdence interval (CI)
after z-score normalization. The growth index was calculated as
followed. Obtain average for all controls in a plate that fall within
the 95% CI after z score normalization for that plate. Obtain average for
all averages across the plates. Obtain growth index by dividing the ﬁnal
average by the time zero value.
Cancer gene panel-based NGS
Genomic DNA was extracted from fresh human and mouse PDX
tissue samples and sequenced as previously described (14). A library
targeting 212 amplicons in 48 genes was generated using the Illumina
TruSeq Amplicon – Cancer Panel that provides pre-designed, opti-
mized oligonucleotide probes for sequencing mutational hotspots in
>35 kilobases of target genomic sequence.
NGS
The gene targets covered by the Illumina MiSeq were as follows:
ABL1, AKT1, ALK, adenomatous polyposis coli (APC), ATM, BRAF,
CDH1, CDKN2A, CSF1R, CTNNB1, EGFR, ERBB2, ERBB4, FBXW7,
FGFR1, FGFR2, FGFR3, FLT3, GNA11, GNAQ, GNAS, HNF1A, HRAS,
IDH1, JAK2, JAK3, KDR, KIT, KRAS, MET, MLH1, MPL, NOTCH1,
NPM1, NRAS, PDGFRA, PIK3CA, PTEN, PTPN11, RB1, RET,
SMAD4, SMARCB1, SMO, SRC, STK11, TP53, VHL. Concordance
between the original sample and its derivative was calculated as
followed: Concordance: C ¼ 100%  (x/ y)
x ¼ number of variants conﬁrmed in both the initial tumor tissue
AND the derivative tissue
y ¼ number of similar variants conﬁrmed in initial tumor tissue OR
the derivative tissue
When there is a threshold (0, 10%, 25%) then there are different
deﬁnitions of when variants are conﬁrmed in both the initial tumor
tissue and the derivative mouse tissue. The variants are conﬁrmed in
both tissues if the variant is above the threshold in at least one tissue
and above zero in the other tissue.
LOBICO
LOBICO is a machine learning approach based on integer linear
programming for solving classiﬁcation problems with weights (15).
Applied to the pharmacologic and genomic data set, LOBICO required
three main inputs during the training stage: (i) a list of binary gene
mutations (on/off) for each cell line (mutation matrix), (ii) a binar-
ization threshold indicating whether a certain cell line is sensitive or
resistant to a given drug, and (iii) a list of weights set to |log(AUC)-b|
for each cell line and drug.
Weighting of gene
The “importance” of a gene for a given drug is calculated as follows:
1. For each drug we have the set F of Pareto-optimal formulae
according to the test set (these are the formulae that make up the
ROC curve for the test data). These formulae have been calculated
with LOBICO.
2. The weight of a gene in a formula is calculated as follows:
Each gene that is not mutated (e.g., BRAF or wild-type BRAF)
counts as 1. The individual weights of a gene (mutated or wild-
type) that occurs multiple times in a formula are added. For
instance, in the formula BRAF & KRAS | BRAF & KIT, BRAF
has a weight of 1 þ (1) ¼ 0, while KRAS has a weight of 1 and
KIT has a weight of 1.
Pharmacogenomic Analysis of PDX Cultures
AACRJournals.org
Mol Cancer Ther; 22(9) September 2023
1101
Downloaded from http://aacrjournals.org/mct/article-pdf/22/9/1100/3360740/1100.pdf by guest on 28 January 2025
3. The importance of a gene for a given drug is calculated as the sum of
the weights for that gene over all Pareto-optimal formulae F divided
by the number of formulae in F.
Binarization threshold
A cell line is deﬁned as sensitive (resistant) based on its AUC value
being lower (larger) than a drug-speciﬁc threshold value b. This binar-
ization threshold is calculated (separately for each drug) in four steps
(K16). The description belowsummarizes the mainapproach adopted in
this work and it highlights any signiﬁcant differences to K16:
Step 1 (Up-sampling): For each of a set of N cell lines, 1,000 AUC
values are generated on the basis of the measured AUC value of the cell
line and its error assuming a normal distribution in log(AUC). K16 use
AUC instead of log(AUC).
Step 2 (Density Estimate): Subsequently, a 1-dimensional proba-
bility density function (pdf) of log(AUC) is calculated from the set of
1,000  N log(AUC) values via a Gaussian kernel density estimate with
a bandwidth of 0.5.
Step 3 (Modeling of resistant cell lines): The log(AUC) values of the
resistant cell lines are modeled as a normal distribution g with its mean
m given by the maximum of the pdf. The median distance from m of all
(upsampled) data points in the interval [q, m] is adopted as the
standard deviation s of g. Here, q is an auxiliary parameter used as
a proxy for b and calculated as described in K16.
Step 4 (Estimating b): The binarization threshold is set to the 10th
percentile of the distribution g. We chose the larger percentile com-
pared with the 5th percentile adopted by K16 to boost the fraction of
sensitive cell lines given the smaller number of cell lines (30–71 per
drug) of our sample.
LOBICO
Following the training stage, LOBICO provides, for each drug d, a
logical formula fd in disjunctive normal form with its propositional
variables given by the binary gene mutations (on/off interpreted as
True/False). The formula fd can be used to predict whether a new cell
line is likely sensitive or resistant to drug d. The on/off state of binary
gene mutations of the given cell line are inserted into the propositional
variables of fd and subsequently the formula is evaluated resulting in a
True or False statement. If fd evaluates to True (False), then the new cell
line is predicted to be sensitive (resistant) to drug d. The speciﬁc
formula fd provided by LOBICO is optimal in minimizing the weighted
mis-match between the predicted sensitivity and the actual sensitivity
of the provided cell lines to drug d. The complexity of the formula fd is
determined by two hyper-parameters K, M. Here, K is the maximum
number of conjunctions in the disjunction, while M is the maximum
number of literals per conjunction.
Figure of merit - AUC
LOBICO allows the addition of constraints on the minimal sensi-
tivity and minimal speciﬁcity of the logical formulae. Following K16,
we vary the lower bounds on the sensitivity and speciﬁcity in steps of
0.05 to ﬁnd formulae with the best possible values of sensitivity,
speciﬁcity, or both (i.e., Pareto efﬁcient formulae) for any given drug
with the help of a nested cross-validation. The sensitivity and spec-
iﬁcity values of these formulae trace out a curve in sensitivity–
speciﬁcity space and the AUC is used as ﬁgure of merit. During the
nested cross-validation, an inner 4-fold cross-validation is employed to
select the K, M hyper-parameters that result in the highest average
(over the inner folds) AUC. Given the tuned hyper-parameters,
LOBICO is then trained during the outer 5-fold cross-validation to
provide a formula for each sensitivity and speciﬁcity bound (provided a
formula satisfying the constraints can be found). Pareto efﬁcient
formulae areidentiﬁed among these formulae by solvingthe maximum
vector problem. A formula f is Pareto efﬁcient if there is no other
formula f’ that is better than f in the following sense. A formula f is
better than a formula f’ if: (i) f has higher sensitivity than f’ and its
speciﬁcity is at least as high as the one of f’, (ii) f has higher speciﬁcity
than f’ andits sensitivity is at least ashigh asthe oneof f’, or (iii) f hasthe
same sensitivity and speciﬁcity as f’ but contains a smaller number of
literals than f’. Subsequently, the sensitivities and speciﬁcities of the set
of Pareto efﬁcient formulae is calculated for each fold (test set) of the
outer cross-validation. The curve traced by the sensitivity and spec-
iﬁcity values of the Pareto efﬁcient formulae is the Pareto frontier.
Finally, the ﬁgure of merit and its error are given by the mean and by
the standard deviation of the area under the Pareto frontier for the 5
folds of the outer cross-validation.
Code availability
The scripts used tocarry out the threshold and LOBICO analysiscan
be found at:
https://github.com/sch2007/pancancer-pharmacogenomic-analy
sis.git.
LOBICO (Knijnenburg and colleagues 2016) is available at https://
github.com/tknijnen/LOBICO.
In vivo treatment studies
In vivo studies were carried out in accordance with the NIH
guidelines and a California Paciﬁc Medical Center (CPMC)-approved
Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee protocol (#18.08.03).
Four toﬁve, 8- to10-week-old female NSG mice (Jackson Laboratories,
Sacramento, CA) bearing subcutaneous PDX tumors were random-
ized according to initial tumor volume. They were treated with either
vehicle or 25 mg/kg ganetespib. Drugs were diluted in 4% DMSO,
4% Tween-80, and 92% saline. Treatment began when PDX tumor
volumes reached approximately 100 mm3. PDX-bearing NSG mice
were treated intraperitoneally daily for 5 consecutive days for approx-
imately 4 weeks or until PDX tumor volumes reached 2,000 mm3.
Tumors were measured approximately once to twice weekly by an
operator blinded to the treatment groups. Mice were housed in a single
ventilated cage in groups of four, provided environmental enrichment
materials, and free access to water and food. At the completion of
in vivo experiments, all animals were humanely killed using CO2
overdose followed by thoracotomy as outline by the American Vet-
erinary Medical Association guidelines for the euthanasia of animals.
Tumor volume was calculated as (length  width2)/2. The response
was determined by comparing tumor volume change at time t to its
baseline: % tumor volume change ¼ DVolt ¼ 100%  ((Vt – Vinitial)/
Vinitial). For comparison of drug response of vemurafenib and cobi-
metinib across PDX, the volume of the treated group for the last
measurement day was compared with the volume of the vehicle
(control) group and tumor volume (% Control) was determined:
100%  [1 þ (Tumor volume treated – Tumor volume vehicle)/ Tumor
volume vehicle]. Four to 5 mice were used for studies based on sample
size calculations from preliminary studies.
Statistical analyses
For in vivo experiments, differences in tumor growth between
treatment groups were evaluated using Two-way ANOVA repeated
measures, and Tukey multiple comparisons test.
Data availability
The data generated in this study are available within the article and
its Supplementary Data ﬁles.
Chang et al.
Mol Cancer Ther; 22(9) September 2023
MOLECULAR CANCER THERAPEUTICS
1102
Downloaded from http://aacrjournals.org/mct/article-pdf/22/9/1100/3360740/1100.pdf by guest on 28 January 2025
Results
Establishment of PDXC models from tumors
78 patient-derived tumor cultures were established across nine
cancers: glioblastoma, colorectal, ovarian, pancreatic, melanoma,
cholangiocarcinoma, gall bladder, and breast (Fig. 1A). A majority
of the cultures were PDXC developed from PDX, but in some cases
enough tissue was collected to develop primary patient-derived
tumor cultures (PDC) for analysis. As previously demonstrated, for
speciﬁc drugs there is highly concordant drug sensitivity across
derivatives (3). For generation of PDX, human tumor tissue samples
were received within 1 to 2 hours after resection and tumor material
was implanted in NSG mice for expansion (Fig. 1B). After suc-
cessful expansion, PDX tissue was collected from mice and PDXC
were established (Fig. 1B). PDX and corresponding PDXC were
analyzed for somatic mutation using the Illumina TruSeq Amplicon
48 gene cancer panel (Fig. 1C), and PDXC were evaluated for
sensitivity to a panel of drugs using HTDS (Fig. 1D). The phar-
macologic and genomic data are combined to create logic models to
predict sensitivity of a given cell line to a drug based on DNA
mutation status (Fig. 1E).
The 78 tumors were obtained from 34 men and 44 women (Sup-
plementary Table S2), with ages ranging from 40 to 90s, and obtained
from various sites. Patients were treatment naive or had speciﬁc
treatment histories for each cancer. The tumor samples collected,
which were used to derive PDC, PDX, and PDXC, reﬂect patient
populations receiving current standard of care.
Concordance of somatic mutations across patients and PDXs
correlates with VAF
For four cancers, melanoma (Fig. 2A), glioblastoma (Fig. 2B),
colorectal (Fig. 2C), and pancreatic (Fig. 2D), there was enough tumor
tissue available from the original patient sample and corresponding
PDX models to perform NGS. A total of 23 matched samples were
analyzed. The nomenclature used for xenograft passaged tumors was X
(ﬁrst generation) and X1 (second generation), corresponding to serial
passaging in vivo. A sequencing library targeting 212 amplicons in
48 genes was generated using the Illumina TruSeq Amplicon – Cancer
Panel. In agreement with previously published Cancer Genome
analyses (18–21) lineage speciﬁc mutations were identiﬁed for indi-
vidual cancers. For example, tumor tissues from the patients and their
corresponding PDXs in melanoma contained BRAF, NRAS, PTEN,
KIT, and TP53 mutations, GBM samples contained PTEN and EGFR
mutations, colorectal cancer samples contained APC and EGFR muta-
tions, and all pancreatic cancer samples contained KRAS mutations.
Among the ﬁve ovarian cancer specimens tested in this study, three
were high-grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSOC), one was later
categorized as squamous cell carcinoma of the cervix (OVCA0033)
and one was a yolk sac tumor (OVCA0027). The HGSOC commonly
carry TP53 mutations, however, these mutations were not detected in
our samples, which may be the result of using a cancer panel that does
not cover all exons (14).
We previously published in melanoma that an increase in VAF
corresponded to an increase in stability of speciﬁc mutations across the
patient tumor, corresponding PDX, and subsequent generations of
Figure 1.
Pharmacogenomic platform for analysis of patient-derived tumor cultures. A, Tumor tissue across nine cancers was collected from patients: glioblastoma (GBM),
colorectal (CRC), ovarian (OVCA), pancreatic (PANC), melanoma (MM), cholangiocarcinoma (CHNG), gall bladder (GAL), and breast (BRC). The distribution of
cancer types is shown. B, The tumors were used to establish PDC and passaged in mice for expansion, and to establish PDXC for a total of 78 unique derivatives.
C, Patient tumors and derivatives were evaluated for DNA mutations using NGS. D, The 78 tumor cultures underwent HTDS (left) to evaluate sensitivity to 19
antitumor agents. The HTDS heat map of a 384-well plate represents no cell death (dark blue) to complete loss of cell viability (dark red). The right panel represents a
typical concentration–response curve generated for a single drug. E, Binarization thresholds determined drug sensitive and resistant populations and logic models of
DNA mutations were developed to predict drug sensitivity.
Pharmacogenomic Analysis of PDX Cultures
AACRJournals.org
Mol Cancer Ther; 22(9) September 2023
1103
Downloaded from http://aacrjournals.org/mct/article-pdf/22/9/1100/3360740/1100.pdf by guest on 28 January 2025
PDXs (14). We, therefore, examined this phenomenon across addi-
tional cancers including additional melanoma samples. For melano-
ma, in patient tumor and ﬁrst generation PDX the total concordance
was 58% for VAF ≥10% and 91% for VAF ≥25%. For glioblastoma, in
patient tumor and ﬁrst generation PDX the total concordance was 65%
for VAF ≥10% and 100% for VAF ≥25%. For colorectal cancer, in
patient tumor and ﬁrst generation PDX the total concordance was 85%
for VAF ≥10% and 100% for VAF ≥25%. For pancreatic cancer, in
patient tumor and ﬁrst generation PDX the total concordance was
100% for VAF ≥10% and 100% for VAF ≥25%. Our data demonstrate
that PDXs harbor somatic mutations in cancer-driving genes as
expected in accordance with TCGA data. Furthermore, the concor-
dance of somatic mutations across patient tumor and matched PDXs
increases as VAF increases. The ﬁdelity of cancer-driving gene muta-
tions across human and PDX samples suggests that responses to
antitumor agents across derivatives would be conserved.
Evaluation of PDXC response to antitumor agents using HTDS
19 antitumor agents were evaluated across 78 patient-derived tumor
cultures, constituting 9 different cancers (Fig. 3A). Tumors were
cultured as tumorspheres in 384-well plates, treated with drugs for
3 days and assessed for cell viability. Because a precision medicine
platform was being developed, we chose our maximum concentration
in the assay to correspond to the maximum plasma concentration
(Cmax) at the highest single dose recommended on the basis of clinical
trials when the information was available, and when the drug was not
limited by solubility (Supplementary Table S1). After drug treatment,
the area under the dose–response curve (AUC) with corresponding
CIs was calculated. As cell viability/proliferation is decreased, the AUC
is reduced (22, 23).
Past studies, and recent large scale screening efforts, demonstrate
that AUC is more effective than either calculating the potency and
efﬁcacy of a drug across multiple cancer lines, because AUC takes into
Figure 2.
SNV and insertion/deletion variants of DNA mutational hotspots from patient tumor and ﬁrst or second generation PDX derivatives. Patient tumor and corresponding
ﬁrst-generation (X) PDX or second-generation (X1) PDX from (A) melanoma (B) glioblastoma (C) colorectal, and (D) pancreatic cancer were compared. The matched
pairs are grouped using colored columns, for example, MM313 with MM313X (light grey). The mutations identiﬁed are listed by row (far left column). Red indicates an
allele frequency (AF) 5%–24%. Black indicates an AF ≥25%.
Chang et al.
Mol Cancer Ther; 22(9) September 2023
MOLECULAR CANCER THERAPEUTICS
1104
Downloaded from http://aacrjournals.org/mct/article-pdf/22/9/1100/3360740/1100.pdf by guest on 28 January 2025
account both drug potency and efﬁcacy in a single value (22, 23).
Notable individual PDXC responses to speciﬁc drugs, as well as
lineage-speciﬁc drug responses where observed. For example, in
BRAF-mutant melanoma there was a strong response to both BRAF
and MEK inhibitors, and as expected, melanomas harboring wild-type
BRAF were insensitive to BRAF inhibitors. The BRAF and MEK
inhibitor responses in PDXC and corresponding PDX have been
previously described by our group in a smaller cohort of melanoma
samples (14). Pan-cancer HTDS analysis also demonstrated notable
higher drug sensitivities to dinaciclib (CDK inhibitor), vorinostat
(histone deacetylase inhibitor), sapanesertib (PI3K/mTOR inhibitor),
gedatolisip (PI3K/mTOR inhibitor) and ganetespib (heat shock pro-
tein 90 inhibitor; Fig. 3A). Ganetespib has been assessed in multiple
clinical trials against various cancers, demonstrating the ability to
produce partial response and stable disease in a subset of patients in
each trial (24). Because HSP90 protects cells under conditions of stress,
HSP90 inhibitors have the ability to sensitize cells to the toxic effects of
chemotherapy and radiation therapy. Therefore, multiple drug com-
bination clinical trials are underway with promising initial ﬁnd-
ings (24). To determine whether the inhibitory activity of ganetespib
in culture (Fig. 3B) would be recapitulated in vivo (Fig. 3C), we treated
mice bearing PDX OVCA0032X with ganetespib. OVCA0032 is an
epithelial carcinoma with a wild-type p53. In PDXC OVCA0032X,
ganetespib produced a potent and efﬁcacious inhibition of cell via-
bility/proliferation. In agreement with the activity observed in PDXC,
we found that ganetespib produced a sustained inhibition of tumor
growth in mice bearing PDX OVCA0032X (Fig. 3C).
In GBM, colorectal, ovarian, pancreatic, melanoma, and lung
PDXCs lineage-speciﬁc sensitivity to drugs were evaluated using
Wilcoxon analysis (Fig. 3D). Again, sensitivity for BRAF and MEK
inhibitors was identiﬁed for BRAF-mutant melanoma, and sensitivity
to MEK inhibitors was also identiﬁed for wild-type BRAF melanoma.
Additional lineage speciﬁc drug responses identiﬁed included, cobi-
metinib sensitivity in lung cancer, and vorinostat sensitivity in mel-
anoma, buparlisib and dinaciclib sensitivity in ovarian cancer, and
everolimus sensitivity in pancreatic cancer. It should also be noted that
breast cancer PDXC BRC0013, containing a EGFR R108K mutation,
had a unique sensitivity to the HER2 inhibitor lapatinib, as expected.
It has been reported in serum-derived cell lines that for speciﬁc
drugs the growth rate (GR) of cells may confound the comparison of
standard pharmacology measures (IC50, Emax, AUC) between cell
lines (17). Modiﬁed pharmacologic analysis (e.g., GR50 and GRmax) to
account for proliferation rate were proposed and were expected to
more correctly facilitate the discovery of biomarkers that predict drug
Figure 3.
Pan-cancer pharmacogenomic analysis of PDCs. A, Pan-cancer HTDS analysis in patient-derived cultures. AUC of 270 equals no effect and 0 represents killing all the
cells. Drugs that stimulate cell growth produce an AUC > 270. Darkest red of the heat map indicates greatest inhibition of cell viability/proliferation, whereas white
equals no response. Grey indicates no data collected. Drugs were arranged on the basis of their primary drug targets. B, Response of OVCA0032X to ganetespib in
culture. Viability represents percentage of cell viability. C, Response of OVCA0032X to ganetespib in vivo (n ¼ 4–5 mice per group). D, Lineage-speciﬁc responses to
drugs determined by Wilcoxon analysis. The scale bar represents P values ≤0.05 (red gradient) and P values > 0.05 (blue gradient).
Pharmacogenomic Analysis of PDX Cultures
AACRJournals.org
Mol Cancer Ther; 22(9) September 2023
1105
Downloaded from http://aacrjournals.org/mct/article-pdf/22/9/1100/3360740/1100.pdf by guest on 28 January 2025
sensitivity. As opposed to serum-derived cancer cell lines that undergo
at least one cell division over a period of 3 days, 25% (n ¼ 40) of PDXC
show limited cell division as assessed by calculating the growth index
(Supplementary Fig. S1). These growth characteristics are more rep-
resentative of patient tumors that are often slow growing. GR analysis
was therefore not appropriate for many PDXC, because the underlying
equations are dependent on a signiﬁcant increase in the cell population
in the control groups over time (17). We therefore calculated the AUC
and standard pharmacologic measures to compare drug sensitivity
across all primary patient-derived tumor models tested.
Binarization threshold determination to classify drug sensitivity
and resistance for logic modeling
We used LOBICO, a computational approach that infers small and
easily interpretable logic models of binary input features that explain a
continuous output variable (15). In the context of this investigation,
this model was used to uncover logic combinations of multiple DNA
mutations that would be more predictive of drug response than single
DNA mutation predictors. Single predictors (e.g., a DNA mutation)
are generally less accurate predicting drug response because of the
complexity of biological pathways driving cancer.
Our analysis was based on screening 19 drugs across 78 patient-
derived tumor cultures from 9 different cancers, and each of the
tumors underwent a targeted resequencing assay for detection of
somatic mutations in cancer genome hotspots. The AUC with corre-
sponding conﬁdence limits was obtained after 3 days treatment with a
drug and served as the continuous output variable. LOBICO was
applied to the AUCs and corresponding conﬁdence limits of each drug
separately. For the ﬁrst step of LOBICO, a binarization threshold for
the output variable is calculated (Fig. 4A; Supplementary Fig. S2,
Supplementary Table S3). This threshold is used to separate the PDXC
into two groups: PDXC sensitive and PDXC resistant to drug (Fig. 4B;
Supplementary Table S4). LOBICO ﬁnds an optimal logic function of
binary mutation features that minimizes the error, which is deﬁned as
Figure 4.
Binarization threshold determination of drug sensitivity. A, Bar histogram of upsampled AUC values (grey) and kernel density estimate (blue). Binarization threshold
b (red) marks the divide between the population of sensitive (smaller AUC values)and resistant (larger AUC values)cancer cells. The x-axis shows log(AUC)values for
cell lines for a particular drug, and the y-axis shows the probability density. B, Percentage of sensitive and resistant patient-derived cancer cells tested for each drug.
Response of 8 melanoma PDX to (C) vemurafenib and (D) cobimetinib. The sensitivity threshold denotes tumor models derived from PDXC that met the criteria of
“sensitive” to drug.
Chang et al.
Mol Cancer Ther; 22(9) September 2023
MOLECULAR CANCER THERAPEUTICS
1106
Downloaded from http://aacrjournals.org/mct/article-pdf/22/9/1100/3360740/1100.pdf by guest on 28 January 2025
the sum of the weighted misclassiﬁed cell lines (15). Importantly, while
this method has been used to deﬁne resistant and sensitive populations
of cell lines, it has never been validated in vivo to determine the extent
to which the classiﬁcation predicts response of a tumor in a preclinical
mouse xenograft model. Validating the drug resistant and sensitive
classiﬁcation obtained using PDXC (culture), in PDX (in vivo) models,
provides increased conﬁdence in the relevance of the binarization
threshold ﬁndings obtained in culture (PDXC).
We chose PDXC and corresponding PDX derived from 8 BRAF-
mutant melanoma for our analysis. We evaluated the resistant
and sensitive classiﬁcation of vemurafenib and cobimetinib in PDXC
to the response observed in vivo (Fig. 4C and D). The AUC-derived
binarization threshold predicted for vemurafenib and cobimetinib in
the PDXC was 2.33 and 2.14, respectively. The log AUC values were:
vemurafenib (MM358X1 ¼ 2.34, MM337X2 ¼ 2.42, MM321X1 ¼
2.22, MM302X ¼ 2.39, MM313X ¼ 2.11, MM314X1 ¼ 2.0, MM334X ¼
1.34, MM325X ¼ 1.29) and cobimetinib (MM358X1 ¼ 2.32,
MM337X1 ¼ 2.15, MM321X1 ¼ 2.22, MM302X ¼ 1.79, MM313X ¼
2.13, MM314X1 ¼ 1.71, MM334X ¼ 1.39, MM325X ¼ 1.12). The log
AUC values for MM358X1, MM337X2, MM321X1, and MM302 were
derived previously (14).
We then compared the response of the corresponding PDX models
to vemurafenib and cobimetinib using previously published data from
our group (14). The drug responses in vivo were originally evaluated by
measuring tumor volume (mm3). In the current study, the tumor
volume (mm3) of the treated group for the last measurement day was
compared with the tumor volume of the vehicle (control) group and
tumor volume (% Control) was calculated. These data were used to
cross compare the response of all 8 PDX to vemurafenib and cobi-
metinib (Fig. 4C and D). Cobimetinib produced robust inhibition of
tumor growth in the models falling under the sensitive classiﬁcation
(Fig. 4D). Inhibition of tumor progression was also observed in a
subset of models falling under the insensitive classiﬁcation, but to a
lesser extent than observed in the sensitive classiﬁcation. For vemur-
afenib, the classiﬁcations deﬁned tumors sensitive and resistant
to treatment in vivo (Fig. 4C). Overall, the binarization threshold
sensitive classiﬁcation determined in culture (PDXC) identiﬁes tumors
that respond to drug in vivo (PDX).
Logic models of DNA mutations to predict drug sensitivity
Once binarization threshold sensitive classiﬁcation were deter-
mined, we next used LOBICO to address the question of how well
drug sensitivity can be explained by logic models of genes evaluated in
the cancer gene panel-based NGS.The mutational data for each sample
is inputted as a binary feature, where 0 is the absence of a DNA
mutation (e.g., wild-type BRAF) and 1 is the presence of a DNA
mutation (e.g., BRAF V6000E) (Supplementary Table S5). During
training, which is carried out separately for each drug, LOBICO
requires both the mutational data and the AUC data for the cell lines.
The AUC data are provided as raw data calculated using a standard
formula (Materials and Methods) or as scaled data from 0 to 1
(Supplementary Table S5). Our analysis incorporated the raw AUC
data. Following the training stage, LOBICO provides, for each drug d,
logical formulae in disjunctive normal form with its propositional
variables given by the binary gene mutations (on/off interpreted as
True/False). These formulae predict whether a new cell line is likely
sensitive or resistant to the considered drug depending on whether
they evaluate to True or False. The logic models provided by LOBICO
are optimal in minimizing the weighted mis-match between the
predicted sensitivity and the actual sensitivity of the provided cell
lines to drug d.
LOBICO allows to put constraints on the sensitivity and speciﬁcity
of logic models. Following (15), we vary the lower bounds on the
sensitivity and speciﬁcity in steps of 0.05 to ﬁnd logic models with the
best possible values of sensitivity, speciﬁcity, or both for any given
drug. The sensitivity and speciﬁcity values of these models trace out a
curve in sensitivity–speciﬁcity space, the Pareto frontier, and the AUC
is then interpreted as ﬁgure of merit (Fig. 5A and B; Supplementary
Fig. S3). To minimize overﬁtting and arrive at a more robust estimate
of the ﬁgure of merit we employ nested cross-validation, consisting of
an inner 4-fold cross-validation to tune the hyper-parameters of the
logic models and an outer 5-fold cross-validation to robustly estimate
the ﬁgure of merit and its error (Supplementary Table S6).
Figure 5B shows the Pareto frontier for the drug dabrafenib. The
Pareto frontier for the additional drugs is presented in Supplementary
Fig. S3. The area under the speciﬁcity – sensitivity curve for dabrafenib
is 0.92 (0.03) if applied to the cell lines in the training and validation
set, and 0.87 (0.14) if applied to the cell lines in the test set during
cross-validation. This indicates that logical models are able to predict
whether cell lines are resistant or not to those drugs with reasonable
accuracy. One of the high scoring logic models for dabrafenib is the
single gene BRAF as is expected for this selective inhibitor, validating
the prediction potential of the model. The predictions for all drugs are
presented in Supplementary Table S6.
The curve in sensitivity–speciﬁcity space (Pareto frontier) shown
in Fig. 5B is associated with a list F of formulae with high sensitivity,
speciﬁcity or both. By analyzing these formulae for each drug, we can
identify genes that help in identifying sensitive and resistant cell lines.
The importance of a gene for a given drug is calculated as follows. First,
the weight of a gene is calculated for each formula f from F. Each gene is
assigned a weight, where each mutated gene (e.g., BRAF V600E) counts
as 1. A gene such as BRAF could have various mutations based on the
NGS panel, which covers multiple mutation hotspots (e.g., BRAF
V600E, BRAF V600K, etc.). Each gene that is not mutated (e.g.,
BRAF or wild-type BRAF) counts 1. If a gene occurs multiple
times in a formula the individual weights are added (an alternative
option would be to average the weights). For instance, in the formula
BRAF & KRAS | BRAF & KIT, BRAF has weight 1 and BRAF has a
weight of 1, therefore the sum of BRAF ¼ (1 þ 1) ¼ 0), KRAS has
weight 1, and KIT has weight 1. Next, the importance of a gene for a
given drug is calculated as the sum of the weights for that gene for each
formula in F divided by the number of formulae in F. Fig. 5C and
Supplementary Table S7 show the gene(s) of importance for each drug.
As shown above, cell lines with BRAF gene mutations are predicted
to be sensitive to treatment with MEK and BRAF inhibitors. As expect
BRAF and MEK inhibitors ranked with high scores for the BRAF gene,
logic models contained BRAF alone or in combination with additional
genes and resistance was predicted by RAS mutations (ref. 25; See also
Supplementary Table S7). EGFR was scored for erlotinib but not
afatanib, the lack of association was the result of tumors not containing
EGFR mutations shown to infer sensitization to the drug such as
Del19/L858R (26). Of note, a gene of importance for the HSP90
inhibitor ganetespib was FGFR3, and many logic models included the
presence of FGFR3 mutations (Supplementary Table S7). Upon review
of the individual DNA mutations, we found multiple cancers (pan-
creatic, lung, and melanoma) deﬁned as sensitive to ganetespib that
contained FGFR3 30_prime UTR variants (Supplementary Table S8).
FGFR3 has been shown to be a strong HSP90 client compared with
other FGFR receptors, and depends on HSP90 for stability and
function (27). In addition, vorinostat ranked with a high score for
BRAF, and had multiple logic models that included BRAF mutations
(Supplementary Table S7), thereby demonstrating a lineage-speciﬁc
Pharmacogenomic Analysis of PDX Cultures
AACRJournals.org
Mol Cancer Ther; 22(9) September 2023
1107
Downloaded from http://aacrjournals.org/mct/article-pdf/22/9/1100/3360740/1100.pdf by guest on 28 January 2025
sensitivity in melanoma (Fig. 3D). Vorinostat has emerged aspotential
single or drug combination therapy in targeting BRAFi-resistant
melanoma through modulation of reactive oxygen species (ROS), or
production of excessive DNA damage (28, 29). The CHK1 inhibitor
LY2603618 also ranked with a high score for BRAF, and had multiple
logic models that included BRAF and RAS mutations; the latter ﬁnding
suggests RAS-activating mutations may not limit the efﬁcacy of a
CHK1 inhibitor. Indeed, it has been shown that a potent and speciﬁc
inhibitor of CHK1 is effective in reducing cell viability and colony
formation of vemurafenib-resistant melanoma cells in culture and
in vivo (30). Resistance to multiple PI3K and mTOR inhibitors was
observed with the presence of APC gene mutations; thisis in agreement
with past studies of drug sensitivities in PDC (3). Interestingly, the
logic models predicting response to the CDK1/2/5/9 inhibitor dina-
ciclib (31) had the highest sensitivity and speciﬁcity with the absence of
multiple mutation, for example the absence of mutation in BRAF,
AKT, KRAS, and TP53.
Discussion
The evaluation of pharmacologic sensitivities of cancer cells
paired with their genomic proﬁle provides a powerful platform for
precision medicine oncology. Over the last decade, multiple inves-
tigations have demonstrated the utility of pharmacogenomics stud-
ies in determining gene(s) predicting sensitivity and resistance to
single and drug combination therapies (4, 8, 32–35). Many of the
large-scale studies have used data from serum-derived cancer cell
lines, including the notable investigations using data derived from
CCLE and GDSC studies (8, 32–36). More recent investigations
have also used similar approaches using patient-derived primary
tumor cultures (3). As opposed to serum-derived cell lines, primary
patient-derived tumor cultures have been shown to more faithfully
recapitulate the genotype and phenotype of the original patient’s
tumor (9–13, 37–39). In addition, a recent study showed that a pan-
cancer analysis, using over 400 unique PDCs, not propagated in
mice, could be used to predict clinical response (3).
Many different statistical and bioinformatics approaches have been
examined to enhance pharmacogenomics prediction (3, 40–42). For
instance, machine learning based modeling approaches such as logical
models, elastic net regression, and random forests as well as ANOVA
models have been successfully applied to predict drug response based
on genetic information (3, 15, 32). LOBICO has been used to explore
pharmacogenomicrelationshipsusingserum-derivedcelllines(15,32),
but this study represents the ﬁrst to use LOBICO for analysis of
primary patient-derived tumors.
In this investigation, we performed a pharmacogenomic analysis of
patient-derived tumor cultures, including PDXC. In contrast to PDC,
they are easily expandable for future mechanistic studies both in
culture and in vivo. In addition, in comparison with studying multiple
drug–gene interactions in PDX models, PDXC offer a lower cost
resource for this type of analysis and are amenable to HTDS analysis
of single and drug combination therapies. We established 78 patient-
derived tumor cultures across 9 cancers. Our data demonstrate that the
tumors harbor somatic mutations in cancer-driving genes, and the
Figure 5.
Logic models of drug sensitivity prediction based on DNA mutation status. A, Schematic illustrating the calculation of the AUC in the sensitivity – speciﬁcity plane.
B, Dabrafenib sensitivity – speciﬁcity curves. C, Gene importance as predicted by the LOBICO analysis. Gene importance is deﬁned as the sum of signed occurrences
of a gene in a Pareto-optimal formula divided by the number of Pareto-optimal formulae for a given drug. Negated and non-negated genes have a signed occurrence
of 1 and þ1, respectively. For instance, the signed occurrence of the gene BRAF in the formula BRAF & KRAS | BRAF & KIT, is zero because 1 þ (1) ¼ 0.
Chang et al.
Mol Cancer Ther; 22(9) September 2023
MOLECULAR CANCER THERAPEUTICS
1108
Downloaded from http://aacrjournals.org/mct/article-pdf/22/9/1100/3360740/1100.pdf by guest on 28 January 2025
concordance of somatic mutations across patient tumor and matched
PDXs increases as VAF increases. Nineteen antitumor agents were
evaluated across 78 patient-derived tumor cultures, constituting 9
different cancers using clinically relevant drug exposures (42). Because
the patient-derived tumor cultures do not contain components of the
microenvironment, we focused our analysis primarily on agents
known to produce antitumor activity by directly targeting tumor cells.
Response to PDXC were recapitulated in PDX models. Lineage-
speciﬁc drug responses were identiﬁed, for instance, response of
melanoma to BRAF and MEK inhibitors. Additional lineage speciﬁc
drug responses identiﬁed included, vorinostat (HDACi) sensitivity in
melanoma, cobimetinib (MEKi) sensitivity in lung cancer, buparlisib
(PI3K) and dinaciclib (CDK1/2/5/9) sensitivity in ovarian cancer, and
everolimus (mTOR) sensitivity in pancreatic cancer.
We next usedlogic modeling anda gene score calculation touncover
gene alterations, both single and combination, that predict response to
speciﬁc drugs. As a ﬁrst step, binarization thresholds were determined
to classify drug sensitivity and resistance in culture for logic modeling.
While this sensitivity classiﬁcation in culture, and additional drug
sensitivity classiﬁcations based on z-score calculations (3), would
theoretically deﬁne responses in vivo, they have never been tested in
detail in preclinical mouse models of cancer. A unique aspect of this
study was to evaluate the correlation between the sensitivity classiﬁ-
cation of BRAF and MEK inhibitors in culture in comparison with
response in vivo. Overall, the binarization threshold sensitive classi-
ﬁcation determined in PDXC predicted a drug response in the
corresponding PDX model. However, for the MEK inhibitor cobime-
tinib, some tumors falling under the resistant classiﬁcation did respond
to drug in vivo. This classiﬁcation may be further improved by
including more cell lines.
Once binarization threshold sensitive classiﬁcations were deter-
mined, logic models of DNA mutations were developed to predict drug
sensitivity and speciﬁcity. The ﬁgure of merit is the AUC of the ROC
curve in the sensitivity–speciﬁcity plane (15). This ROC curve is the
Pareto frontier of LOBICO-optimal solutions subject to minimal
sensitivity and speciﬁcity constraints. Genes of importance for each
drug were then determined by calculating the average signed occur-
rence of that gene (þ1 for mutated type, 1 for wild-type) in the
LOBICO-optimal formulae.
As expected, BRAF and MEK inhibitors ranked with high scores
for the BRAF gene, logic models contained BRAF alone or in
combination with additional genes and resistance was predicted by
RAS mutations (25). There were multiple novel gene–drug associa-
tions, and logic models of interest uncovered by the analysis. For
example, a gene of importance for tumor cell sensitivity to ganetespib
was FGFR3, and many logic models included the presence of FGFR3
mutations. In FGFR3-driven bladder cancer, ganetespib produces
potent cytotoxicity comparable with the pan-FGFR tyrosine kinase
inhibitor BGJ398 (43). How the 3_prime UTR variants observed in
our PDXC deﬁned as sensitive to ganetespib affect the HSP90/
receptor interaction remains to be determined, but provides an
example of how pharmacogenomic analysis using the described
platform may identify biomarkers of response to speciﬁc drugs. In
addition, a gene of importance for sensitivity to vorinostat was
BRAF. Multiple logic models for this drug included BRAF mutations,
and there was also a lineage speciﬁc drug sensitivity in BRAF-wild-
type melanoma. This inhibitory activity of vorinostat alone and in
combination with other antitumor agents has been shown in a HTDS
of melanoma PDC (5); however, there were no genomic correlates
described for this activity. As discussed, sensitivity to vorinostat
has been reported in melanoma through modulation of ROS, or
production of excessive DNA damage (28, 29). Of interest, BRAF
mutation (common in melanoma) was labeled a high predictor of
sensitivity to vorinostat, whereas TP53 mutation denoted resistance
to the drug. The CHK inhibitor LY2603618 also ranked with a high
score for BRAF and this drug has been shown to be effective at
inhibiting tumor growth in vemurafenib-resistant melanoma (30).
Resistance to PI3K and mTOR inhibitors was also predicted by APC
mutations in agreement with past pharmacogenomics analysis of
PDC (3). The CDK inhibitor dinaciclib can control the expression
of multiple short-lived proteins involved in cancer cell survival (31).
It had unique logic models where sensitivity was predicted by
the absence of mutations in multiple cancer driving genes including
ATM, TP53, BRAF, SMAD4, or was predicted by the presence
of EGFR, MET, NRAS, FGFR3 mutations. This may relate to the
more global transcriptional inhibition produced by dinaciclib.
Intriguingly, our data indicate that many of our ovarian PDXC
fall within these classiﬁcations leading to lineage-speciﬁc sensitivity
to dinaciclib.
The limited number of drug-sensitive PDXCs poses a challenge for
the present analysis. However, even with this issue, we were able to
observe strong drug–gene association with classical genes such as
BRAF. In addition, multiple novel gene–drug associations and logic
models of interest were uncovered by the analysis. One challenge is that
the calculation of the AUC requires at least one sensitive and one
resistant cell line per training/validation/testing data set to calculate
sensitivities and speciﬁcities. As a form of mitigation, we distributed
sensitive and resistant cell lines in approximately equal proportions
among the training/validation/testing data sets during cross valida-
tion. As more PDXC drug–gene data is added to the model, error in
AUC estimates will be reduced. Furthermore, increasing the number of
cell lines analyzed will also enable the use of more ﬂexible LOBICO
formulae (i.e., larger values for K and M) thus potentially increasing the
AUC ﬁgure of merit. Even with these caveats, multiple lineage and gene
(s) speciﬁc drug sensitivities were identiﬁed as described above,
including novel associations.
Overall, we performed a pharmacologic analysis of antitumor
agents used at clinically relevant doses in expandable primary
patient-derived tumors across cancers. Using logic modeling, the
pharmacologic data were combined with DNA mutational analysis
of cancer driving genes in the primary patient-derived tumors to
determine somatic gene mutation(s) deﬁning response to antitumor
agents. Taken together, these results describe a novel strategy for
developing a pharmacogenomic platform for precision medicine
oncology using expandable primary patient-derived tumors.
Authors’ Disclosures
M. Kashani-Sabet reports other support from Melanoma Diagnostics, DNARx,
LLC; and personal fees from Bristol-Myers Squibb outside the submitted work; in
addition, M. Kashani-Sabet has a patent for US-20130344481-A1 issued, a patent for
US-9920377-B2 issued, and a patent for US-11142796-B2 issued. No disclosures were
reported by the other authors.
Authors’ Contributions
S.H. Chang: Conceptualization, data curation, formal analysis, writing–original
draft. R.J. Ice: Data curation, methodology. M. Chen: Methodology. M. Sidorov:
Methodology. R.W.L. Woo: Methodology. A. Rodriguez-Brotons: Methodology.
D. Jian: Methodology. H.K. Kim: Methodology. A. Kim: Methodology. D.E. Stone:
Methodology. A. Nazarian: Methodology. A. Oh: Methodology. G.J. Tranah: Formal
analysis, funding acquisition. M. Nosrati: Methodology, project administration.
D. de Semir: Data curation, methodology. A.A. Dar: Data curation, methodology.
P.Y. Desprez: Formal analysis, investigation, writing–review and editing. M. Kashani-
Sabet: Conceptualization, formal analysis, writing–review and editing. L. Soroceanu:
Pharmacogenomic Analysis of PDX Cultures
AACRJournals.org
Mol Cancer Ther; 22(9) September 2023
1109
Downloaded from http://aacrjournals.org/mct/article-pdf/22/9/1100/3360740/1100.pdf by guest on 28 January 2025
Conceptualization, formal analysis, writing–review and editing. S.D. McAllister: Con-
ceptualization, formal analysis, supervision, writing–original draft.
Acknowledgments
We thank all the cancer speciﬁc clinical teams for providing the tumor specimens
for this study. We also thank Dr. Robert Feldmann at the University of Zurich for
guidance on statistical methods, Tam Le Ho for high-throughput screening, and Tri
Luu for DNA extraction. This work was funded by a grant from the California Paciﬁc
Medical Center Foundation in support of the Cancer Avatar program at CPMC
Research Institute.
The publication costs of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of
publication fees. Therefore, and solely to indicate this fact, this article is hereby
marked “advertisement” in accordance with 18 USC section 1734.
Note
Supplementary data for this article are available at Molecular Cancer Therapeutics
Online (http://mct.aacrjournals.org/).
Received July 22, 2022; revised December 11, 2022; accepted July 10, 2023;
published ﬁrst July 13, 2023.
References
1. Salgado R, Moore H, Martens JWM, Lively T, Malik S, McDermott U, et al. Steps
forward for cancer precision medicine. Nat Rev Drug Discov 2018;17:1–2.
2. Kim G, McKee AE, Ning YM, Hazarika M, Theoret M, Johnson JR, et al.
FDA approval summary: vemurafenib for treatment of unresectable or met-
astatic melanoma with the BRAFV600E mutation. Clin Cancer Res 2014;20:
4994–5000.
3. Lee JK, Liu Z, Sa JK, Shin S, Wang J, Bordyuh M, et al. Pharmacogenomic
landscape of patient-derived tumor cells informs precision oncology therapy.
Nat Genet 2018;50:1399–411.
4. Kurtz SE, Eide CA, Kaempf A, Khanna V, Savage SL, Rofelty A, et al. Molecularly
targeted drug combinations demonstrate selective effectiveness for myeloid- and
lymphoid-derived hematologic malignancies. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2017;114:
E7554–E63.
5. Friedman AA, Xia Y, Trippa L, Le LP, Igras V, Frederick DT, et al. Feasibility of
ultra-high-throughput functional screening of melanoma biopsies for discovery
of novel cancer drug combinations. Clin Cancer Res 2017;23:4680–92.
6. Garralda E, Paz K, Lopez-Casas PP, Jones S, Katz A, Kann LM, et al. Integrated
next-generation sequencing and avatar mouse models for personalized cancer
treatment. Clin Cancer Res 2014;20:2476–84.
7. Bottomly D, Wilmot B, Tyner JW, Eide CA, Loriaux MM, Druker BJ, et al.
HitWalker: variant prioritization for personalized functional cancer genomics.
Bioinformatics 2013;29:509–10.
8. Basu A, Bodycombe NE, Cheah JH, Price EV, Liu K, Schaefer GI, et al. An
interactive resource to identify cancer genetic and lineage dependencies targeted
by small molecules. Cell 2013;154:1151–61.
9. Izumchenko E, Paz K, Ciznadija D, Sloma I, Katz A, Vasquez-Dunddel D, et al.
Patient-derived xenografts effectively capture responses to oncology therapy
in a heterogeneous cohort of patients with solid tumors. Ann Oncol 2017;28:
2595–605.
10. Yu J, Qin B, Moyer AM, Sinnwell JP, Thompson KJ, Copland JA
3rd, et al.
Establishing and characterizing patient-derived xenografts using pre-chemotherapy
percutaneous biopsy and post-chemotherapy surgical samples from a prospective
neoadjuvant breast cancer study. Breast Cancer Res 2017;19:130.
11. Oh BY, Lee WY, Jung S, Hong HK, Nam DH, Park YA, et al. Correlation between
tumor engraftment in patient-derived xenograft models and clinical outcomes in
colorectal cancer patients. Oncotarget 2015;6:16059–68.
12. Rosfjord E, Lucas J, Li G, Gerber HP. Advances in patient-derived tumor
xenografts: from target identiﬁcation to predicting clinical response rates in
oncology. Biochem Pharmacol 2014;91:135–43.
13. Hidalgo M, Amant F, Biankin AV, Budinska E, Byrne AT, Caldas C, et al. Patient-
derived xenograft models: an emerging platform for translational cancer
research. Cancer Discov 2014;4:998–1013.
14. Ice RJ, Chen M, Sidorov M, Le Ho T, Woo RWL, Rodriguez-Brotons A, et al.
Drug responses are conserved across patient-derived xenograft models of
melanoma leading to identiﬁcation of novel drug combination therapies. Br J
Cancer 2020;122:648–57.
15. Knijnenburg TA, Klau GW, Iorio F, Garnett MJ, McDermott U, Shmulevich I,
et al. Logic models to predict continuous outputs based on binary inputs with an
application to personalized cancer therapy. Sci Rep 2016;6:36812.
16. Zusman E, Sidorov M, Ayala A, Chang J, Singer E, Chen M, et al. Tissues
harvested using an automated surgical approach conﬁrm molecular heteroge-
neity of glioblastoma and enhance specimen’s translational research value.
Front Oncol 2019;9:1119.
17. Hafner M, Niepel M, Chung M, Sorger PK. Growth rate inhibition metrics
correct for confounders in measuring sensitivity to cancer drugs. Nat Methods
2016;13:521–7.
18. Waddell N, Pajic M, Patch AM, Chang DK, Kassahn KS, Bailey P, et al. Whole
genomes redeﬁne the mutational landscape of pancreatic cancer. Nature 2015;
518:495–501.
19. Cancer Genome Atlas Network. Genomic classiﬁcation of cutaneous melanoma.
Cell 2015;161:1681–96.
20. Sadanandam A, Lyssiotis CA, Homicsko K, Collisson EA, Gibb WJ, Wullschleger
S, et al. A colorectal cancer classiﬁcation system that associates cellular pheno-
type and responses to therapy. Nat Med 2013;19:619–25.
21. Phillips HS, Kharbanda S, Chen R, Forrest WF, Soriano RH, Wu TD, et al.
Molecular subclasses of high-grade glioma predict prognosis, delineate a pattern
of disease progression, and resemble stages in neurogenesis. Cancer Cell 2006;9:
157–73.
22. Haverty PM, Lin E, Tan J, Yu Y, Lam B, Lianoglou S, et al. Reproducible
pharmacogenomic proﬁling of cancer cell line panels. Nature 2016;533:333–7.
23. Fallahi-Sichani M, Honarnejad S, Heiser LM, Gray JW, Sorger PK. Metrics other
than potency reveal systematic variation in responses to cancer drugs. Nat Chem
Biol 2013;9:708–14.
24. Jhaveri K, Modi S. Ganetespib: research and clinical development. Onco Targets
Ther 2015;8:1849–58.
25. Spagnolo F, Ghiorzo P, Queirolo P. Overcoming resistance to BRAF inhibition in
BRAF-mutated metastatic melanoma. Oncotarget 2014;5:10206–21.
26. Chong CR, Janne PA. The quest to overcome resistance to EGFR-targeted
therapies in cancer. Nat Med 2013;19:1389–400.
27. Laederich MB, Degnin CR, Lunstrum GP, Holden P, Horton WA. Fibroblast
growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR3) is a strong heat shock protein 90 (Hsp90) client:
implications for therapeutic manipulation. J Biol Chem 2011;286:19597–604.
28. Maertens O, Kuzmickas R, Manchester HE, Emerson CE, Gavin AG, Guild CJ,
et al. MAPK pathway suppression unmasks latent DNA repair defects and
confers a chemical synthetic vulnerability in BRAF-, NRAS-, and NF1-mutant
melanomas. Cancer Discov 2019;9:526–45.
29. Wang L, Leite de Oliveira R, Huijberts S, Bosdriesz E, Pencheva N, Brunen D,
et al. An acquired vulnerability of drug-resistant melanoma with therapeutic
potential. Cell 2018;173:1413–25.
30. Hwang BJ, Adhikary G, Eckert RL, Lu AL. Chk1 inhibition as a novel therapeutic
strategy in melanoma. Oncotarget 2018;9:30450–64.
31. Parry D, Guzi T, Shanahan F, Davis N, Prabhavalkar D, Wiswell D, et al.
Dinaciclib (SCH 727965), a novel and potent cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor.
Mol Cancer Ther 2010;9:2344–53.
32. Iorio F, Knijnenburg TA, Vis DJ, Bignell GR, Menden MP, Schubert M, et al. A
landscape of pharmacogenomic interactions in cancer. Cell 2016;166:740–54.
33. Seashore-Ludlow B, Rees MG, Cheah JH, Cokol M, Price EV, Coletti ME, et al.
Harnessing connectivity in a large-scale small-molecule sensitivity dataset.
Cancer Discov 2015;5:1210–23.
34. Garnett MJ, Edelman EJ, Heidorn SJ, Greenman CD, Dastur A, Lau KW, et al.
Systematic identiﬁcation of genomic markers of drug sensitivity in cancer cells.
Nature 2012;483:570–5.
35. Barretina J, Caponigro G, Stransky N, Venkatesan K, Margolin AA, Kim S, et al.
The Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia enables predictive modelling of anticancer
drug sensitivity. Nature 2012;483:603–7.
36. Yang W, Soares J, Greninger P, Edelman EJ, Lightfoot H, Forbes S, et al.
Genomics of Drug Sensitivity in Cancer (GDSC): a resource for therapeutic
biomarker discovery in cancer cells. Nucleic Acids Res 2013;41:D955–61.
37. Lee J, Kotliarova S, Kotliarov Y, Li A, Su Q, Donin NM, et al. Tumor stem cells
derived from glioblastomas cultured in bFGF and EGF more closely mirror the
phenotype and genotype of primary tumors than do serum-cultured cell lines.
Cancer Cell 2006;9:391–403.
Chang et al.
Mol Cancer Ther; 22(9) September 2023
MOLECULAR CANCER THERAPEUTICS
1110
Downloaded from http://aacrjournals.org/mct/article-pdf/22/9/1100/3360740/1100.pdf by guest on 28 January 2025
38. Bertotti A, Papp E, Jones S, Adleff V, Anagnostou V, Lupo B, et al. The genomic
landscape of response to EGFR blockade in colorectal cancer. Nature 2015;526:
263–7.
39. KreplerC,XiaoM,SproesserK,BraffordPA,ShannanB,BeqiriM,etal.Personalized
preclinical trials in BRAF inhibitor-resistant patient-derived xenograft models
identify second-line combination therapies. Clin Cancer Res 2016;22:1592–602.
40. Ben-Hamo R, Jacob Berger A, Gavert N, Miller M, Pines G, Oren R, et al.
Predicting and affecting response to cancer therapy based on pathway-level
biomarkers. Nat Commun 2020;11:3296.
41. McGrail DJ, Lin CC, Garnett J, Liu Q, Mo W, Dai H, et al. Improved prediction of
PARP inhibitor response and identiﬁcation of synergizing agents through use
of a novel gene expression signature generation algorithm. NPJ Syst Biol Appl
2017;3:8.
42. Liston DR, Davis M. Clinically relevant concentrations of anticancer drugs: a
guide for nonclinical studies. Clin Cancer Res 2017;23:3489–98.
43. Acquaviva J, He S, Zhang C, Jimenez JP, Nagai M, Sang J, et al. FGFR3
translocations in bladder cancer: differential sensitivity to HSP90 inhibition
based on drug metabolism. Mol Cancer Res 2014;12:1042–54.
AACRJournals.org
Mol Cancer Ther; 22(9) September 2023
1111
Pharmacogenomic Analysis of PDX Cultures
Downloaded from http://aacrjournals.org/mct/article-pdf/22/9/1100/3360740/1100.pdf by guest on 28 January 2025
