Citation: Udalov, A.; Kumar, L.;
Gaudette, A.N.; Zhang, R.; Salomao,
J.; Saigal, S.; Nosrati, M.; McAllister,
S.D.; Desprez, P.-Y. Automated
Dashboards for the Identiﬁcation of
Pathogenic Circulating Tumor DNA
Mutations in Longitudinal Blood
Draws of Cancer Patients. Methods
Protoc. 2023, 6, 46. https://doi.org/
10.3390/mps6030046
Academic Editor: John Asara
Received: 16 February 2023
Revised: 16 April 2023
Accepted: 19 April 2023
Published: 1 May 2023
Copyright:
© 2023 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed
under
the
terms
and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
Technical Note
Automated Dashboards for the Identiﬁcation of Pathogenic
Circulating Tumor DNA Mutations in Longitudinal Blood
Draws of Cancer Patients
Aleksandr Udalov 1,†, Lexman Kumar 1,†, Anna N. Gaudette 1, Ran Zhang 1, Joao Salomao 1, Sanjay Saigal 1,
Mehdi Nosrati 2, Sean D. McAllister 2 and Pierre-Yves Desprez 2,*
1
Graduate School of Management, UC Davis, 1 Shields Ave., Davis, CA 95616, USA
2
California Paciﬁc Medical Center, Research Institute, 475 Brannan St., San Francisco, CA 94107, USA
*
Correspondence: pydesprez@cpmcri.org; Tel.: +1-(415)-600-1760
†
These authors contributed equally to this work.
Abstract: The longitudinal monitoring of patient circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) provides a power-
ful method for tracking the progression, remission, and recurrence of several types of cancer. Often,
clinical and research approaches involve the manual review of individual liquid biopsy reports after
sampling and genomic testing. Here, we describe a process developed to integrate techniques utilized
in data science within a cancer research framework. Using data collection, an analysis that classiﬁes
genetic cancer mutations as pathogenic, and a patient matching methodology that identiﬁes the same
donor within all liquid biopsy reports, the manual work for research personnel is drastically reduced.
Automated dashboards provide longitudinal views of patient data for research studies to investigate
tumor progression and treatment efﬁcacy via the identiﬁcation of ctDNA variant allele frequencies
over time.
Keywords: liquid biopsy; metastasis; next-generation sequencing
1. Introduction
A major goal of precision medicine in cancer is to provide effective and speciﬁc
therapies for patients by incorporating more biomarker-directed therapies [1]. To facilitate
personalized treatment in cancer, studies pertaining to high-throughput drug screens of
individual patient primary tumor cultures as well as the genomics landscape of their tumors
are being evaluated, as part of the Cancer Avatar Project, at the California Paciﬁc Medical
Center Research Institute. We recently published our institutional experience of developing
a liquid biopsy approach using circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) analysis of plasma for
personalized medicine for cancer patients. The focus of this study was on the hurdles
encountered during the multistep process in order to beneﬁt other investigators wishing
to set up this type of study in their institution [2]. In this manuscript, we also describe
some case reports using longitudinal samples, illustrating the potential advantages and
rewards in performing ctDNA sequencing to monitor tumor burden or guide treatment for
cancer patients.
Compared to traditional biopsies, liquid biopsies are more convenient, easily obtain-
able, and present minimal procedure risks to patients. ctDNA, as a part of circulating
cell-free DNA (ccfDNA) in peripheral blood, contains gene mutations found in primary tu-
mors, and the serial sampling of ctDNA can have diagnostic value and predict the response
to treatment and the clinical outcome. Earlier studies have shown the potential power of
this approach to monitor tumor burden in cancer patients [3,4]. So far, these results suggest
the potential of ctDNA analysis in the monitoring of disease progression and treatment
response in individual cancer patients [5–7].
Methods Protoc. 2023, 6, 46. https://doi.org/10.3390/mps6030046
https://www.mdpi.com/journal/mps
Methods Protoc. 2023, 6, 46
2 of 11
Pharmacological studies focus on drug testing to estimate efﬁcacy, while genomic
analyses focus on the identiﬁcation of pathogenic mutations in the patient [8]. The identiﬁ-
cation of speciﬁc pathogenic DNA mutations can drive the choice of the pharmacological
agent used to treat a patient, and the presence of such mutations can be tracked over time
using liquid biopsy tests. With over 600 liquid biopsy reports ﬂowing into the laboratory
computers, our process of identifying pathogenic mutations and organizing the reports by
individual patients, which are appropriate for a research context independent of a clinical
setting, had been a cumbersome manual process.
Here, we describe an automated way of identifying pathogenic mutations from liquid
biopsy reports and grouping them at a patient level. The method uses no patient identiﬁable
markers and is essentially anonymous. We discuss the underlying theory of this process
using the techniques in data science and provide a way to replicate it in any organizational
setup. The focus of this paper is to provide a replicable, automated methodology to
organize ctDNA information sourced from liquid biopsy and identify the patients to
perform longitudinal analyses.
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Genetic Sequencing Method
2.1.1. Circulating (Cell-Free) Tumor DNA Extraction
Extraction was performed on 655 human plasma samples. Informed consent was
obtained from all subjects involved in the study, which was conducted according to the
guidelines of the Declaration of Helsinki and approved by the Institutional Review Board
of Sutter Health (protocol code 2015.059-1 approved on 3 October 2022). Blood samples
were collected in tubes (PAXGene blood tubes) with preservatives to increase shelf life and
ccfDNA (which corresponds to DNA fragments shed by all cell types including cancer
cells) was isolated using the QIAamp Circulating Nucleic Acid kit (Qiagen, Redwood City,
CA, USA), and quantiﬁed using PicoGreen (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, South San Francisco,
CA, USA).
2.1.2. Next-Generation Sequencing
We selected the 56G Oncology Panel V2 from Swift Biosciences (Ann Arbor, MI), which
contained 56 gene targets: ABL1, AKT1, ALK, APC, ATM, BRAF, CDH1, CDKN2A, CSF1R,
CTNNB1, DDR2, DNMT3A, EGFR, ERBB2, ERBB4, EZH2, FBXW7, FGFR1, FGFR2, FGFR3,
FLT3, FOXL2, GNA11, GNAQ, GNAS, HNF1A, HRAS, IDH1, IDH2, JAK2, JAK3, KDR, KIT,
KRAS, MAP2K1, MET, MLH1, MPL, MSH6, NOTCH1, NPM1, NRAS, PDGFRA, PIK3CA,
PTEN, PTPN11, RB1, RET, SMAD4, SMARCB1, SMO, SRC, STK11, TP53, TSC1, and VHL.
MiSeq 2 × 151 base paired-end sequencing was performed to detect single-nucleotide
variant (SNV) and insertion/deletion (indel) at 1% allelic frequency or higher in target
regions with sufﬁcient read coverage (at least 100×).
2.1.3. Data Analysis
ccfDNA data obtained using the 56G Oncology Panel V2 was analyzed using Genialis
Expressions (Accel-Amplicon analysis workﬂow, Genialis Inc., Boston, MA, USA). In brief,
quality trimmed (Trimmomatic v.0.36) sequencing data was aligned to the human genome
(GRCh37 assembly) using BWA MEM (v. 0.7.17-r1188). The aligned data were further
processed by trimming primer sequences (Primerclip, Swift biosciences) and using GATK
(v.3.6) tools (IndelRealigner and BaseRecalibrator) to prepare the analysis-ready BAM ﬁle.
SNP/INDELs were named using LoFreq (v.2.1.3.1) and annotated using snpEff (v.4.3k).
2.2. Pathogenic Matching Approach
Reference data were obtained from the COSMIC (Catalogue of Somatic Mutations in
Cancer) database that consolidates data from peer-reviewed publications and other genomic
data screening sources in order to provide a comprehensive overview of cancerous genetic
mutations [9]. This data source was ﬁltered to reduce the number of variables to the gene
Methods Protoc. 2023, 6, 46
3 of 11
name, amino acid mutation, type (pathogenic/neutral), and FATHMM (Functional Analysis
through Hidden Markov Model) score. Duplicates were removed and the resulting data
were uploaded into an SQL (Structured Query Language) database in order to automate the
classiﬁcation of liquid biopsy reports. COSMIC aggregates latest research on cancer-causing
mutations and assigns a probability score for these mutations. When using this database,
it is advisable to update the data source twice a year to identify new ﬁndings on novel
pathogenic gene mutations.
Input Genialis ﬁles (or similar sequencing results with comparable structure) were
uploaded into an internal database via Python script (an open-source object-oriented
computer programming language). This programming code serves multiple functions
beyond database creation and data load. Built-in functionality includes a check for whether
the sample is already included in the database in order to prevent redundancy in data
collection. The program identiﬁes the level of pathogenicity, based on the gene and amino
acid mutations within the sample and identical combinations in the COSMIC database,
before consolidating data from both sources into a database for further analysis.
2.3. Patient Similarity Analysis
Liquid biopsy reports collected from the patients are anonymous. A major part of the
genomic analyses involves tracking of pathogenic mutations that are detected from the
bloodstream. With anonymity, there is a need to identify liquid biopsy reports that belong
to the same patient. This could be accomplished by leveraging the fact that the fragments of
ccfDNA detected from the bloodstream are unique to each human. We, therefore, attempted
to quantify the similarity of liquid biopsy reports to identify if they would belong to the
same patient.
We leveraged the cosine similarity method from vector algebra [10]. The mathematics
uses two objects—a scalar and a vector. Scalar is an object that can be represented as a
single number; it has only magnitude. Since a vector has magnitude and a direction, it
is plotted in an N-dimensional space. An example of a scalar is speed (which is simply a
number representing magnitude), while the vector form is velocity (it has both magnitude
and direction in a 3D space). Similarly, every liquid biopsy report can be represented as a
vector with genes as dimensions and their allele frequency as the corresponding magnitude.
The similarity of vectors can be quantiﬁed by measuring how close their projection is on
one another.
In order to increase the range of similarity scores, we added another layer before the
similarity score calculation. We used k-means clustering method to separate the samples set
into two groups to ease the computation process by reducing the number of samples that
are compared to one another. This clustering method ensures that no two samples falling
into the two different groups are similar to each other, but that each remains comparable
to the ones within the group. Similarity scores were computed within each group, and
any sample that had not seen a match based on the score was extracted from both groups.
They were shufﬂed to increase the probability of obtaining the right match while reducing
computation time overall.
2.4. Longitudinal Data Visualization
After the pathogenic matching and the patient similarity analysis were conducted, the
ﬁnal data were uploaded via the Python script into a database for integration with Tableau,
a visualization platform [11]. This table includes indicators for germline mutations, deﬁned
as gene and mutation combinations with allele frequencies around either 50% or 100%.
Additionally, a ﬂag for allele frequencies < 1% was included in order to provide ﬁltering
options for visualization that retain only larger frequency pathogenic mutations to facilitate
clinical analysis. Overall, all the necessary code to build this data platform can be found
at the following website address: https://github.com/azurey0/cpmc-prac (accessed on 1
April 2023).
Methods Protoc. 2023, 6, 46
4 of 11
3. Results
The project’s initial objective was to improve research efﬁciency by automating the
classiﬁcation of pathogenic gene mutations presented in the liquid biopsy reports. As
our understanding of the data structure improved, we uncovered a second objective: to
expand the research by identifying the liquid biopsy samples that belonged to the same
patient without the need for speciﬁc patient information. Lastly, we combined the gene
classiﬁcation with the patient matching to show how the pathogenic genes evolved in the
same patient. To deliver the results, we used Tableau [11], in which the user can easily
upload new samples and navigate and check information about the gene classiﬁcation,
patient matching, and longitudinal analyses.
3.1. Pathogenic Mutation Matching
First, gene and mutation data points were mapped from Genialis standard forms
(Figure 1) to the nomenclature utilized in the COSMIC database. Figure 2A provides an
overview of the data processing ﬂow for the matching methodology, Figure 2B provides
the view of the database table for COSMIC data, and Figure 2C provides the patient
matching results. The two sources were combined by matching the gene and amino acid
changes, ﬁnding the associated FATHMM or pathogenicity score, and creating an output
that combines both sources into a ﬁnal consolidated data source (Figure 2D).
Figure 1. Example of report received from Genialis.
Methods Protoc. 2023, 6, 46
5 of 11
Figure 2. Pathogenic mutation matching. (A) Gene matching process workﬂow describing the process
of merging two different datasets to create the ﬁnal data. (B) MySQL Table Schema for COSMIC data
source. (C) MySQL Table Schema for patient matching results. (D) Example of liquid biopsy report
after gene matching process.
During loading, the Python program presented in the Materials and Methods section
identiﬁed the Amino Acid Change column (column “AA” in Figure 1) and the Gene
column (column “GENE” in Figure 1) of the input ﬁle. The program then translated the
AA column into the nomenclature used in the COSMIC database (Figure 2B) and then
matched the same columns in the COSMIC database and determined whether COSMIC
classiﬁed each gene and mutation combination as Pathogenic or Neutral. The Python script
found COSMIC’s associated FATHMM score, which is a measure of pathogenicity severity
(1 being the highest and 0.8 being the cut off for pathogenic mutations) and then loaded the
new sample data into the Patient Matching database (Figure 2C). Additionally, the code
checked whether the number of rows and a ratio of the number of rows to the total number
of genes in the sample report were within normal ranges. Files with less than 32 total gene
and mutation combinations, or that had a ratio of mutations to genes greater than 0.25,
were ﬂagged as potentially having an issue with the genetic sequencing for research and
clinical consideration. This issue was also notable in the patient similarity analysis below.
A manual review of more than 600 unique liquid biopsy samples compared to this
automated methodology successfully identiﬁed all previously known pathogenic muta-
tions for the samples at a benchmark of a FATHMM score greater than 0.8 (Figure 2D).
Additionally, several mutations were identiﬁed as pathogenic that had not been isolated
during the manual review. The subsequent quality check indicated that the programmatic
method of classifying genetic mutations was sufﬁcient. In combination with the beneﬁt of
liquid biopsy results as a non-invasive alternative to identifying cancer patients that have
ctDNA detectable in the blood, this program results in a greater speed for obtaining ﬁnal
liquid biopsy analysis results for research and, potentially, clinical use.
3.2. Patient Matching
As presented in the Materials and Methods section, we utilized a cosine similarity
algorithm [10] to perform the patient matching required for the longitudinal monitoring of
the liquid phase biopsy results. A simpliﬁed version of a 3D vector is shown in Figure 3A,
in which the line joining OP is a vector pointing towards P. The x, y, and z components are
Methods Protoc. 2023, 6, 46
6 of 11
the dimensions of the vector while Px, Py, and Pz are their corresponding magnitudes. Ex-
trapolating this to the liquid biopsy reports, we represented each row of Figure 1 as a vector
with genes as the dimensions and their allele frequency as the corresponding magnitude.
Figure 3.
Patient matching.
(A) Mathematical representation of a point P in cartesian three-
dimensional coordinates that describes the vector notation. (B) Cosine similarity of two vectors: a
mathematical measure to ﬁnd the similarity of two vectors by the angle made between them. The
smaller the angle, ‘theta’, the higher the similarity. (C) Similarity score calculation process in the
form of a ﬂowchart. (D) Similarity scores of 7 liquid biopsy reports—sample results are based on the
described methodology (in yellow, score range between 0.95 and 0.98).
In Figure 3B, we present two vectors with an angle, ‘theta’, between them. Assuming
the vectors are of an equal length, when ‘theta’ is zero, they are most similar (similarity of
1), and when the angle is 90 degrees, they are least similar (similarity of 0). This method
involves the computation of the cosine projection [10]. We used this technique to compute
the similarity scores of any two liquid biopsy reports. Using the panel that comprised
56 genes, we based the similarity score not on the pathogenic mutations but on genes
carrying germline mutations or speciﬁc polymorphisms, which point to the uniqueness of
the patient. All the non-pathogenic mutations correspond to irrelevant mutations that are
part of the ccfDNA produced by normal cells.
The overall patient matching process is described in Figure 3C, in which the ﬁnal
output has similarity scores for all the liquid biopsy reports, and the best reports (scores
closer to 1) are grouped together. K-means clustering, which uses most of the available
irrelevant/non-tumorigenic gene mutations (including germlines, polymorphisms, and
synonymous mutations), was performed to split all samples into two clusters or split
the liquid biopsy results into groups that were more similar to one another. The cosine
similarity analysis was then run for each ﬁle in comparison to the others in the bucket. If
no match was identiﬁed for a patient report, it was rerun against the others. Lastly, the
algorithm provided an output that indicated which ﬁles were most similar to one another,
with these groups being essentially patients. The number of clusters (K = 2 in this study)
Methods Protoc. 2023, 6, 46
7 of 11
was chosen based on the sample set available and could be changed when the sample
size increased.
The testing and conﬁrmation indicated that the cosine similarity technique was ef-
fective in identifying similar reports by quantifying their similarity. The empirical cut-off
identiﬁcation was based on a manual test set of 10% of the samples for which we knew
belonged to the same patient. For 56 genes and 60 samples, our score of 0.98 yielded 0 false
positives. When we used this threshold on the rest of the unknown samples, the theoretical
likelihood of incorrect matches was based on the likelihood of having twins in the sample
set or the likelihood of missing critical germline mutations/polymorphisms in the genetic
sequencing process. For the 600 samples considered, we reached a threshold score of 0.98
above which the likelihood of incorrect matching approaches 0 (no false positives). Scores
over 0.98 belonged to the same patient in 100% of the cases based on external validation.
Due to the presence of noise and inaccuracy in the sequencing of ctDNAs from the blood,
some reports that belonged to the same patient could have scores less than 0.98. We have
identiﬁed a score range, between 0.95 and 0.98, which contained reports that had the poten-
tial to belong to the same patient, i.e., a range that could have a potential match but not
with 100% accuracy. An example of a result set is shown in Figure 3D. In some cases, these
patients might be closely related to each other, having a high similarity in their genome,
while some correspond to the same patients, but the inaccuracy stems out of sequencing
errors. Even though, in a few cases, as described above, it could miss reports that belonged
to the same patient, overall, our model performed well with no false positive matches.
3.3. Longitudinal Visualization
Final results from the pathogenic matching and the patient similarity analysis were
uploaded via the same Python script into an output database as structured in Figure 4A.
Tableau software integrated this database and provided the dashboards shown in Figure 4B,C.
We built the longitudinal analysis by combining the gene classiﬁcation with the patient
matching. Once we determined which anonymous liquid biopsies belonged to the same
patient, it was possible to check how each pathogenic gene mutation evolved over time.
From an efﬁciency perspective, this monitoring could be helpful as an indicator of the
effectiveness of speciﬁc treatments and to spot additional cancer signals that would require
further testing and clinical follow-up. Time is a crucial factor in cancer care. The opportunity
to monitor the genes more closely and to be able to respond quickly can be lifesaving.
Figure 5A,B provide an overview of two case studies used for longitudinal patient
monitoring. Figure 5A shows the ongoing monitoring of a single pancreatic cancer patient
that indicates the detection of a KRAS mutation in the third longitudinal blood draw.
Figure 5B shows an overview of a second patient with colorectal cancer. A BRAF mutation
was detected in the ﬁrst blood draw, a subsequent sample indicated remission, and then a
new pathogenic mutation in KRAS was detected in a third blood draw, suggesting cancer
recurrence, which could prompt clinical staff for further follow-up.
Methods Protoc. 2023, 6, 46
8 of 11
Figure 4. Longitudinal Visualization (A) MySQL Table Schema for the visualized Tableau output
data. (B) Search & Overview page on the Tableau visualization. The following describes the elements
in the Tableau interface: 1. Sample Name Selection: User can choose the sample based on the names
available in the dataset; 2. Sample Sequencing Output Quality Check: A measure to determine the
quality of the sequencing based on pre-identiﬁed factors that contribute to poor quality sequencing; 3.
Pathogenic Mutations in the Sample: The number of pathogenic mutations that are seen in the sample
based on our gene matching methodology; 4. Similar Samples: The number of similar samples in the
database that are likely from the same patient based on our patient matching methodology; 5. Allele
Frequency: Summarization of the allele frequency of gene mutations as per the report; 6. FATHMM
Score: The pathogenicity indicator on a scale from 0 to 1, as reported by the COSMIC dataset hosted
by the Sanger Institute, UK; 7. Genes: The name of the genes, as per the report; 8. Mutations: The
identity of the mutations, as per the report; 9. Germline Mutations: The indication as to whether the
gene mutation is germline. (C) Report page on the Tableau visualization. The following describes
the elements in the Tableau interface: 1. Report Name: The indication of the report that is being
reported in the page; 2. Allele Frequency Filter: The function used to ﬁlter mutations above 1%
variant allele frequency; 3. Predicted Patient Matches: The patient name provided if the methodology
clearly identiﬁes a patient match based on previous available reports in the database; 4. Potential
ID Check: A summary of the other potential patient matches if they exist. Otherwise, it shows the
predicted match; 5. Pathogenic List: A list of identiﬁed pathogenic mutations in the report; 6. Neutral
List: A list of identiﬁed mutations that are not clearly pathogenic; 7. Lower List: A list of identiﬁed
mutations with a very low pathogenicity score.
Methods Protoc. 2023, 6, 46
9 of 11
Figure 5. Longitudinal Visualization—case studies based on longitudinal analysis. (A) Pancreatic
Cancer Patient—A case study based on longitudinal analysis. (B) Colorectal Cancer Patient—A case
study based on longitudinal analysis.
Methods Protoc. 2023, 6, 46
10 of 11
4. Discussion
ctDNA analysis in peripheral blood is a liquid biopsy that contains representative
tumor information, which includes information concerning gene mutations found in pri-
mary tumors [5]. These speciﬁc genetic changes found in ctDNA can have diagnostic value
and can predict responses to treatment and patient survival. Additionally, as these liquid
biopsies are easily obtainable, repeated samples can be taken for the real-time monitoring
of both cancer patients’ response during the course of treatment and disease progression
over time. As such, peripheral blood liquid biopsies that contain tumor-representative
ctDNA have been proposed as an alternative to solid tumor biopsies [12].
The longitudinal visualization of the pathogenic gene mutations can improve patient
monitoring [3]. With a limited test sample set, a way to address the theoretical likelihood
of incorrect matches is to build a conﬁdence interval of the empirical cut-off by randomly
sampling the test set and applying the proposed methodology to identify the probabilistic
occurrence of the score that makes the false positives equal to zero. Overall, this longitudinal
visualization offers a non-invasive alternative to checking how the pathogenic genes are
evolving. It can be used for the following strategies. First, it can help assess the effectiveness
of a drug in treating the patient’s cancer. By monitoring the evolution of a known pathogenic
mutation, the physician can measure the effect of a speciﬁc treatment in dealing with a
particular kind of cancer. This is the principle of precision medicine [1]: to use information
about a person’s gene abnormalities to use targeted treatment. Second, it can help identify
new pathogenic gene mutations, which could be the consequence of clonal expansion
within a heterogeneous tumor. Cancer is a disease in which tumor cells proliferate rapidly
and, over time, can spread to other parts of the body. By monitoring the liquid biopsy
reports, it might be possible to identify pathogenic mutations at an earlier stage, when the
treatment is easier and more effective.
The methodology presented here would help any team in a research context to build
a data platform to automatically map identiﬁed mutations with their pathogenicity score
and link reports to the same patient based on their genetic identity, i.e., their germline
mutations, polymorphisms, and synonymous mutations originating from normal tissues.
With improved technology, it might be possible to detect fragments of RNAs and/or
proteins in the blood that might serve as a hint to signal disease or disorder in certain
parts of the human body. Blood can serve as an important medium of inspection due to
the presence of cell components circulating throughout the body [13]. The potential of
detecting such fragments of DNA/RNA/protein could help identify and track the health
of a patient over time. With the use of such data platforms, it would then be possible to
evaluate many approaches for tracking patient health by using cellular fragments present
in the blood to detect and/or monitor a variety of diseases including cancer.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, S.D.M. and P.-Y.D.; methodology, A.U., L.K., A.N.G., R.Z.
and J.S.; software, A.U., L.K., A.N.G., R.Z. and J.S.; validation, A.U., L.K., A.N.G., R.Z. and J.S.;
formal analysis, S.S., M.N., S.D.M. and P.-Y.D.; resources, M.N., S.D.M. and P.-Y.D.; writing—original
draft preparation, A.U., L.K., A.N.G., R.Z., J.S. and P.-Y.D.; writing—review and editing, S.D.M.;
supervision, S.S., S.D.M. and P.-Y.D.; project administration, M.N., S.D.M. and P.-Y.D.; funding
acquisition, M.N., S.D.M. and P.-Y.D. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of
the manuscript.
Funding: This work was supported by funds from the Research and Education Leadership Committee
of the California Paciﬁc Medical Center Foundation.
Institutional Review Board Statement: The study was conducted according to the guidelines of the
Declaration of Helsinki and approved by the Institutional Review Board of Sutter Health (protocol
code 2015.059-1 approved on 3 October 2022).
Informed Consent Statement: Informed consent was obtained from all subjects involved in the study.
Data Availability Statement: The authors conﬁrm that the data supporting the ﬁndings of this study
are available within the article.
Methods Protoc. 2023, 6, 46
11 of 11
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1.
Tsimberidou, A.M.; Fountzilas, E.; Nikanjam, M.; Kurzrock, R. Review of precision cancer medicine: Evolution of the treatment
paradigm. Cancer Treat. Rev. 2020, 86, 102019. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
2.
Chen, M.; Jian, D.; Sidorov, M.; Woo, R.W.L.; Kim, A.; Stone, D.E.; Nazarian, A.; Nosrati, M.; Ice, R.J.; de Semir, D.; et al. Pitfalls
and Rewards of Setting Up a Liquid Biopsy Approach for the Detection of Driver Mutations in Circulating Tumor DNAs: Our
Institutional Experience. J. Pers. Med. 2022, 12, 1845. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
3.
Forshew, T.; Murtaza, M.; Parkinson, C.; Gale, D.; Tsui, D.W.Y.; Kaper, F.; Dawson, S.-J.; Piskorz, A.M.; Jimenez-Linan, M.; Bentley,
D.; et al. Noninvasive Identiﬁcation and Monitoring of Cancer Mutations by Targeted Deep Sequencing of Plasma DNA. Sci.
Transl. Med. 2012, 4, 136ra68. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
4.
Dawson, S.-J.; Tsui, D.W.; Murtaza, M.; Biggs, H.; Rueda, O.M.; Chin, S.-F.; Dunning, M.J.; Gale, D.; Forshew, T.; Mahler-Araujo, B.;
et al. Analysis of Circulating Tumor DNA to Monitor Metastatic Breast Cancer. N. Engl. J. Med. 2013, 368, 1199–1209. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
5.
Duffy, M.J.; Crown, J. Use of Circulating Tumour DNA (ctDNA) for Measurement of Therapy Predictive Biomarkers in Patients
with Cancer. J. Pers. Med. 2022, 12, 99. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
6.
Pascual, J.; Attard, G.; Bidard, F.-C.; Curigliano, G.; De Mattos-Arruda, L.; Diehn, M.; Italiano, A.; Lindberg, J.; Merker, J.;
Montagut, C.; et al. ESMO recommendations on the use of circulating tumour DNA assays for patients with cancer: A report
from the ESMO Precision Medicine Working Group. Ann. Oncol. 2022, 33, 750–768. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
7.
Dang, D.K.; Park, B.H. Circulating tumor DNA: Current challenges for clinical utility. J. Clin. Investig. 2022, 132, e154941.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
8.
Levati´c, J.; Salvadores, M.; Fuster-Tormo, F.; Supek, F. Mutational signatures are markers of drug sensitivity of cancer cells. Nat.
Commun. 2022, 13, 2926. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
9.
Tate, J.G.; Bamford, S.; Jubb, H.C.; Sondka, Z.; Beare, D.M.; Bindal, N.; Boutselakis, H.; Cole, C.G.; Creatore, C.; Dawson, E.; et al.
COSMIC: The Catalogue of Somatic Mutations in Cancer. Nucleic Acids Res. 2019, 47, D941–D947. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
10.
Xie, J.; Wang, M.; Xu, S.; Huang, Z.; Grant, P.W. The Unsupervised Feature Selection Algorithms Based on Standard Deviation
and Cosine Similarity for Genomic Data Analysis. Front. Genet. 2021, 12, 684100. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
11.
Strachna, O.; Cohen, M.A.; Ba, M.M.A.; Pﬁster, D.G.; Lee, N.Y.; Wong, R.J.; McBride, S.M.; Ba, R.R.M.; Kemeny, E.; Polubriaginof,
F.C.G.; et al. Case study of the integration of electronic patient-reported outcomes as standard of care in a head and neck oncology
practice: Obstacles and opportunities. Cancer 2020, 127, 359–371. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
12.
Cheng, F.; Su, L.; Qian, C. Circulating tumor DNA: A promising biomarker in the liquid biopsy of cancer. Oncotarget 2016, 7,
48832–48841. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
13.
Haber, D.A.; Velculescu, V.E. Blood-Based Analyses of Cancer: Circulating Tumor Cells and Circulating Tumor DNA. Cancer
Discov. 2014, 4, 650–661. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.
